The Project Gutenberg eBook of Friends and cousins, by Abbie Farwell
Brown

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Friends and cousins

Author: Abbie Farwell Brown

Illustrator: Ethel C. Brown

Release Date: December 18, 2022 [eBook #69570]

Language: English

Produced by: David E. Brown and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
             at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FRIENDS AND COUSINS ***





By Abbie Farwell Brown

  FRIENDS AND COUSINS. Illustrated. 12mo, $1.00.

  BROTHERS AND SISTERS. Illustrated. 12mo, $1.00.

  THE STAR JEWELS AND OTHER WONDERS. Illustrated. Square 12mo, $1.00.

  THE FLOWER PRINCESS. Illustrated. Sq. 12mo, $1.00.

  THE CURIOUS BOOK OF BIRDS. Illustrated. Square 12mo, $1.10, _net_.
    Postpaid, $1.21.

  A POCKETFUL OF POSIES. Illustrated. 12mo, $1.00, _net_. Postpaid,
    $1.09.

  IN THE DAYS OF GIANTS. Illustrated. 12mo, $1.10, _net_. Postpaid,
    $1.21. _School edition_, 50 cents, _net_, postpaid.

  THE BOOK OF SAINTS AND FRIENDLY BEASTS. Illustrated. 12mo, $1.25.
    _School Edition_, 50 cents, _net_, postpaid.

  THE LONESOMEST DOLL. Illustrated. Sq. 12mo, 85 cents, _net_. Postpaid,
    95 cents.

  HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN & CO.
  BOSTON AND NEW YORK




FRIENDS AND COUSINS




[Illustration: TOM BECOMES AN OUTLAW]




  FRIENDS AND
  COUSINS

  BY
  ABBIE FARWELL BROWN

  ILLUSTRATED BY
  ETHEL C. BROWN

  [Illustration]


  BOSTON AND NEW YORK
  HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN AND COMPANY
  The Riverside Press, Cambridge
  1907




  COPYRIGHT 1907 BY ABBIE FARWELL BROWN

  ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

  _Published September 1907_




CONTENTS


CHAPTER                          PAGE

     I. The Wigwam                  1

    II. Indians                    10

   III. The Ants’ Fire-Escape      18

    IV. Beech House                27

     V. Mutiny                     36

    VI. The Pirate Cave            47

   VII. The Pirate Hoard           62

  VIII. Treasure Trove             72

    IX. The Box of Candy           83

     X. The Outlaw                 91

    XI. Gull Rock                  99

   XII. The Rescue                109




ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                          PAGE

  Tom becomes an Outlaw             _Frontispiece_ (_page 94_)

  Kenneth and Rose see a Strange Face in the Wigwam         10

  The Little Prouts came to make their First Call           28

  The Pirates attack the Picnic Party                       50

  Tom, Charlie, and Kenneth dig for the Treasure            78

  Rose and Sue cross upon the Slippery Stones              100




FRIENDS AND COUSINS




CHAPTER I

THE WIGWAM


When, after a long winter in the city, Kenneth and Rose came back to
the Island which was their summer home, they were eager to see all
their favorite places.

On the very first morning they both wanted to visit the bathing beach
and the Indian forest, the chasm and the pirate cave. They wanted to
know what new wonders had sprouted in the garden of live flowers, and
how much their little oak tree had grown. They wanted to see if there
were any deer tracks down by the spring, and if there was still a
wasp’s nest in a certain spot under the stone wall. Besides, there was
the beech tree, where Rose had her summer-house; and the theatre among
the rocks, where they used to speak pieces; and the post office in the
hollow pine,--and a hundred other places which they loved. It was very
hard to choose. But finally they decided that most they wanted to see
the wigwam in the forest.

They had discovered the wigwam in the forest by accident one day last
summer, and they had seen it only that once; for the very next day
they went back to the city. What a pity they had not found it sooner!
Kenneth and Rose could hardly wait for summer to come so that they
could visit it again; it was such a lovely place in which to play
Indian hunter.

This first morning was not a very good one for a walk in the woods. It
was gray and misty, threatening rain before night. But the children
were not going to postpone their plans on that account. Kenneth put on
his Indian suit, and took his bow and arrows. Rose wore her moccasins
and wampum belt. Kenneth was sure that he remembered the way to the
wigwam, although it was a long distance and he had gone but once.

The forest came close to the back door of Sweetbrier Cottage, and the
children entered it by the same path up which the little Prouts came
every day to bring the milk. Presently they came to another path,
which branched to the right. This one was very narrow and indistinct,
difficult to follow even in bright sunlight, but Kenneth remembered it
well.

Soon they were in the midst of the dim, gray-green forest. The trees
were so thick that there was little sunshine here, even on a pleasant
day. They trotted happily along, their feet crunching the dry twigs
and springing on the elastic moss. How good it seemed to feel the pine
needles under foot, instead of brick sidewalks and asphalt!

The path grew fainter and fainter. It wavered and branched and strayed
off in every direction, as if it were not quite sure which way to go.
But Kenneth seemed to know where to turn, just as Indian hunters always
do. Rose thought him wonderful. She did not remember anything at all
except the greenness of the moss and ferns and the brownness of the
tree-trunks. On they went, farther and farther.

“I think we are almost there now,” said Kenneth at last. “I remember
that old dead pine, don’t you, Rose?”

“No,” said Rose honestly. “I don’t remember. But I do think we must be
almost there. It seems a long, long way.”

But when they came into the open space beyond the pine tree, there was
no wigwam waiting them. Kenneth looked surprised.

“Well, it must be just a little farther,” he said. And they trudged on.
It was growing darker and darker in the forest. A gray veil seemed to
be drawing around them, hiding the way. Rose shivered.

“I wish I had worn my coat,” she said. “I think it is going to rain,
Kenneth. Don’t you think we had better go home?”

“No, indeed!” cried Kenneth. “We are almost there now. Yes,--I remember
that oak tree with the big rock beside it. I am _sure_ we are there
now;” and he brushed eagerly through the bushes.

But when they passed the oak tree, there was no wigwam. Rose shook her
curls uneasily. “I want to go home,” she said. “It isn’t nice in the
forest when there is no sunshine. The trees are full of gray smoke. I
wish we had waited for a sunny day.”

“It isn’t smoke, it is fog,” said Kenneth. “I am sure that this _was_
the place, but the wigwam is gone. Somebody must have pulled it down.
Perhaps the Indians themselves came back.”

Rose looked over her shoulder anxiously. “Let’s go home,” she said.

“Well, perhaps we had better,” agreed Kenneth. He remembered that
sometimes the Island fogs grew so thick that even the fishermen were
afraid of losing their way.

They turned about and started towards the little thin path which they
had left a few minutes earlier. But where had the path gone? They could
not find it anywhere. The fog was creeping around them so that they
could see scarcely ten feet ahead. Kenneth took Rose by the hand, and
together they stumbled on over the moss and dead branches. But still
they found no path. Every few minutes they would stop and look about,
and then, fearing that they were going wrong, would start in another
direction. The fog grew thicker, and they could hardly see one another.
Kenneth’s cap was dewed with heavy drops, and Rose’s curls looked
almost as though she had been in bathing.

She squeezed Kenneth’s hand tightly. “Are we lost, Kenneth?” she asked,
in a brave voice.

“No, we aren’t lost,” he answered. “We know where we are,--right in the
middle of the forest. But I can’t remember the way home. Let us shout.
Perhaps some one will hear us and show us the way.”

They shouted as loudly as they could,--“Hello! Hello! Hello-o-o!” again
and again; but nobody answered. There was not a sound in the forest;
only cold, damp, gray fog came sifting silently everywhere.

“I wish we hadn’t come,” said Rose. “Shall we get home before night? I
shouldn’t like to sleep in the forest. There might be snakes.”

Suddenly they ran into something like a wooden fence. “Hurrah!” cried
Kenneth. “Look, Rose, here is the wigwam now. I told you we were near
it all the time.”

Kenneth was right. There they stood in the very door of the wigwam,
which had been hidden by the fog.

They gave a shout of joy and went inside. Yes, there it stood, just as
they had left it a year ago. There was the piny roof, the pile of brush
for a sofa; the little heap of stones which had been their play stove;
the cupboard made of a hollow log.

“Somebody has been in our house,” said Kenneth, like the Great Big Bear
in the story. “Here are some pieces of broken crockery.”

“Somebody has been sitting on our sofa,” cried Rose, like the
Middle-sized Bear, “and she has left her shawl. See!”--she held up a
plaid shawl. “It is nice and warm. I am going to put it on.”

“It is an Indian blanket,” said Kenneth. “And look! Somebody has been
into our cupboard and has left something to eat!” he cried, like the
Little Wee Bear. He held up a pail full of blueberries, big and ripe
and luscious. “Rose, it must be the Indians!”

Both the children glanced at the door and shivered. Never had the
Indians seemed so near. It was very creepy here alone in the forest.
The fog might be hiding all sorts of dangers which they could not see.

But soon Rose took courage. “I don’t believe it was Indians,” she said.
“Indians don’t leave things all ready for lost children. It must be the
fairies. I _knew_ there were fairies in this forest. I have told you
so, Kenneth, ever so many times. I am hungry and I am going to eat the
berries. If the fairies left them it will be perfectly safe.”

“Pooh!” said Kenneth, who did not believe in fairies. But he decided
to help eat the berries. The two sat down on the pine-bough sofa and
began to dip out handful after handful. And the luncheon tasted so good
that they spoke hardly a word for five minutes. The wigwam was as quiet
as before they had come.




CHAPTER II

INDIANS


Suddenly, outside the wigwam, a twig snapped. There was,--yes, there
certainly was a rustle in the bushes. Steps were creeping towards the
wigwam. It sounded like an Indian. Kenneth grabbed his bow and arrows.
Rose kept very still, but her fingers trembled. They both sat staring
at the door of the wigwam.

Stealthily a face came peering around the side of the door--a dark,
reddish-brown face, with bright eyes. Then another face appeared; then
another. It seemed as if the fog were full of eager faces and shiny,
black eyes.

“It is the Indians!” said Kenneth to himself. “At last they have really
come!” He lifted his bow and pointed the arrow at the face of the
tallest Indian. But just as he was about to let the arrow fly, the
head in the doorway moved and a voice cried,--

[Illustration: KENNETH AND ROSE SEE A STRANGE FACE IN THE WIGWAM]

“Don’t shoot! I am a friend.”

Kenneth’s arm dropped with surprise, and as it did so a figure stole
into the tent. Behind it, out of the fog, crept five other figures in
Indian file, each shorter than the one before it. They were none of
them big or terrible. The tallest was about Kenneth’s own height, and
the smallest was hardly more than a baby. Three of them were boys and
three were girls, and the little ones kept behind the others as if they
were afraid.

“Ho!” said Kenneth. “I thought at first you were Indians!” and he began
to laugh.

The biggest boy laughed, too. “No, we aren’t Indians,” he said shyly.
“We are Captain Prout’s children from the Cove. I am Tom and this is
Mary. That one with the freckles is Susan, and the three little ones
are Bill and Bob and Jane.”

“The little Prouts!” exclaimed Rose; and they all looked at one another
curiously. Although Kenneth and Rose had been coming to the Island for
years, this was the first time that they had stood face to face with
their little neighbors who brought the milk every morning. The Prout
children had always been very shy. After they had stared for some time,
Kenneth remembered to be polite.

“How do you do?” he said. “I am Kenneth Thornton, and this is my sister
Rose.”

“Oh, we know who you are,” said Mary Prout, “and we knew you came
yesterday. We heard you yell for help just now, and we guessed where
we’d find you. We were right close by. We were coming back to get the
berries that Sue left here,”--she stopped abruptly, seeing the empty
pail which Rose was holding.

“Oh, I am so sorry!” said Rose. “We have eaten all your lovely berries;
but we thought the fairies had brought them to us.” Then they all
laughed and felt better acquainted. “I suppose this is your shawl,
too?” asked Rose, pulling it off.

“Yes,” said Mary, “but you are very welcome to it and the berries, too.
I am so glad we left them here!”

“But how did you know about our wigwam?” said Kenneth.

The little Prouts looked at one another and laughed. “Why, you see,”
said Tom, “we thought it was _our_ wigwam. We built it, you know”--

“_You_ built it!” interrupted Kenneth and Rose together.

“We thought it was the Indians,” explained Kenneth.

“What clever children you are!” said Rose admiringly.

The little Prouts looked pleased and proud. The three smallest ones
stole out from behind Tom and Mary and Sue, and stood in a half circle
around Kenneth and Rose.

“Then we had no right to come here at all,” said Kenneth, much
mortified. “We were very rude to walk into your house and eat up your
berries and wear your shawl. But we did not know. Come, Rose;” and he
started for the door.

“Oh, _please_ don’t go!” begged Tom and Mary together. And Susan and
Bill and Bob and Jane said, “_Please_ don’t go!”

“Won’t you stay and play Indian hunter, the way you did that day last
year?” said Tom eagerly.

“Why, how did you know about that?” asked Kenneth, in surprise. “You
were not here.”

“Yes, we were,” nodded Mary. “We were right over there behind the big
rock. We watched you all the time.”

“Why didn’t you come and play with us?” said Rose. “It would have been
so much nicer with eight of us, instead of two.”

The faces of the little Prouts lighted up joyously. “Oh, would you play
with us?” said Tommy.

“We didn’t dare, then,” said Mary shyly. “But now it’s different.”

Susan drew close to Rose and touched her hand gently. “We know about
‘Brothers and Sisters’ now,” she said. “You told in the letter when
you sent us the box of lovely Christmas things that we were all like
brothers and sisters together, because we had one Father. So we aren’t
going to be afraid of you any more. You were so kind to us!”

“Oh, that’s all right,” said Kenneth awkwardly, for he hated to be
thanked. “We didn’t do anything. But it will be fine to have a big band
of Indians and Pirates. Shall we play Indian now?”

“Yes!” they all cried, dancing up and down like real little Indians.
And so they played together. Tommy was the Indian chief, and Rose,
Bill, and little Jane were in his band. Kenneth was Hawkeye, the famous
Indian hunter, with Mary for his trusty guide, and Susan and Bob were
his scouts.

All that morning the foggy forest rang with the sound of war whoops
and the shouts of victorious hunters, as the fights raged about the
wigwam. It was great fun. The Indian chief knew the woods so well
that he could find his way everywhere, even in the thick fog. Hawkeye
would have had a hard time trying to find him but for the service of
his brave scouts. As it was, they had some narrow escapes from being
scalped. But they finally captured Jane-Little-Injun as their prisoner.

By this time they knew, because of their hungriness, that it must be
noon. So they called a parley with the Indians, and smoked a peace
pipe--Susan found one growing in the forest.

“I suppose we must go home,” said Kenneth, with a sigh. Then his face
fell. The fog was thicker than ever, and he knew that he could never
find his way home. He hated to confess it to the Indian chief. But
Tommy Prout was a thoughtful Indian.

“We have smoked the peace pipe,” he said. “Now we Indians will go with
Hawkeye and his braves and show you the quick trail home.”

And back through the fog they went in Indian file, talking and
laughing and telling one another about things which were so different
in the city and on the Island; for the little Prouts were full of eager
questions about the city, which they had never seen, while Kenneth
and Rose were just as anxious to know what the Island was like in the
winter.

When they reached the broad path by the back door, Tommy and the other
Prout children said good-by, and started back to the Cove, because it
was late, and their father and mother did not know where they were.

“Good-by,” said Kenneth and Rose.

“Don’t forget to come to-morrow to play with us again,” added Kenneth.

“Be sure and bring your dolls,” said Rose to the little girls. “And
they shall all play with my Alice under the beech tree.”

You can imagine whether or not the little Prouts promised to come.




CHAPTER III

THE ANTS’ FIRE-ESCAPE


It was not quite bedtime; for they had tea early at the Island, so that
after the fire was lighted in the big chimney the children might have a
little hour with the grown-ups for a game or a story, or for whatever
pleasant thing might happen.

Kenneth and Rose ran to get their fat cushions, and put them down in
the two corners of the hearth. Kenneth’s cushion was red, and he always
sat on the right hand of the fireplace. Rose’s cushion was blue, and
she sat on the left.

Papa began to poke the fire to make it burn more brightly, for it was
not so big and bustling a blaze as usual.

“Somebody forgot to fill the wood-box,” he said. “We need a nice crisp
birch log to make the fire crackle. Who wants to run out to the
wood-pile and bring one in?”

“I do!” cried Kenneth, jumping up eagerly.

“Oh, I do!” cried Rose, jumping up too.

“Well, you may both go,” said Papa. “And between you I think you can
bring in a good big one. But mind not to trip over it.”

Out they ran to the wood-pile, which was close behind the house on the
edge of the forest, where Rose suspected that the fairies lived, and
where Kenneth was sure that there were Indians. But neither Kenneth nor
Rose was afraid. They were very brave children, especially by daylight.

“Here is a nice little log,” said Rose.

“Oh, that isn’t half big enough,” cried Kenneth scornfully. “Let’s
carry this one, Rose. This is something like;” and he seized one of the
very largest logs in the wood-pile.

“All right,” said Rose; and she bravely stretched her little arms
around the other end. They tugged and they tugged, and they grunted
and grunted, and they pulled and pulled; and finally, after pushing
and hauling and rolling and shoving it, they got the log up on to the
piazza, where it fell with a _bang!_ Out came their father and mother
to see what all the noise meant.

“Mercy!” cried their mother. “How could you two children bring in such
an enormous log as that? Aren’t your poor little backs broken?”

“I’m not so very small. I’m ten,” said Kenneth, drawing himself up.

“And I am seven,” said Rose proudly.

“Of course,” said their father; “it is good exercise for them, Mama,
and will make them big and strong. Don’t you remember the story about
the poor little girl who learned to carry a cow upstairs, and so the
Prince married her?”

“Oh, how did she learn?” cried Rose eagerly. “Could I do it?”

“Why, you see, she carried the little calf upstairs every day--every
day of its life. Of course it was growing all the time, so that before
she knew it, the calf had become a big cow, and the little girl was
carrying the cow upstairs as easily as you please. Then the Prince came
along and married her.”

“That sounds like one of Aunt Clare’s stories,” said Rose.

“What did he want to marry her for?” asked Kenneth. “Princes’ wives
don’t need to carry cows, do they?”

“Well, I forget the rest of the story,” said Papa. “But there was a
reason; a very good reason indeed, if I could only remember it. There
always is a reason for things in fairy stories, isn’t there, Rosie?”

“Yes, indeed!” said Rose. But Kenneth sniffed.

Papa seized the big log in both arms as easily as the Princess did the
cow, carried it in and threw it on the fire, which spouted up with
a burst of sparks, like a fiery fountain. The bark began to crackle
deliciously. Rose and Kenneth cuddled down on their cushions, one on
each side of the fire, and watched the little tongues of flame lick the
old log greedily. They loved the fire. Usually it made somebody think
of a story.

Suddenly Rose cried out “Oh!” so loudly that even Kenneth jumped. Rose
was pointing into the fire, and her forehead was puckered with distress.

“Why, what is it, Rose?” asked her mother.

“Oh, oh!” cried Rose again. “Oh, the poor little ants! Do look!”

Sure enough! the old log must have been an ants’ house. The poor little
things were creeping out of the holes in it and scurrying wildly about
in every direction, seeking a way of escape from their dwelling, which
was growing hotter and hotter every minute.

The foremost of them tried to climb down the andirons. But these were
too hot, and soon they went scurrying back again. They grew wilder and
wilder, wandering about crazily as if they did not know what to do.
Their home was surrounded by flame on every side. Some of them tried
to jump down. But Rose shuddered to see the poor things fall into the
fire or upon the hot hearth and shrivel up into sad little cinders. It
was too dreadful!

“Oh, Mama and Papa, what shall we do?” she cried. “I cannot bear to see
them. It is just like a house full of people being burned, with nobody
to help. Kenneth, can’t we do something?”

“Ding-dong! Call out the fire-engine!” roared Kenneth, jumping up and
galloping to the kitchen for a pail of water. Kenneth was always ready
for a new game.

“Water will do no good. You cannot put out the fire without drowning
them,” called Kenneth’s father. “I am afraid the poor ants are doomed,
Rosie. It is like a crowded tenement house, isn’t it?” he said to
Mama. “The poor little creatures crowd together like people in the
upper-story windows, hoping for a ladder.”

“That is what they need--a fire-escape,” cried Rose. “Oh, I must make a
fire-escape quickly!”

She ran to the wood-box and seized a long, flat piece of wood. This
she took for her fire-escape, resting one end on the rug in front of
the hearth, and the other on top of the log which had now caught fire
and was blazing briskly. It made a nice little bridge from the burning
wood above the hot hearthstone. Almost immediately an ant spied the
fire-escape and started across it eagerly. Another followed him; then
another and another, until a constant procession was filing down the
bridge toward safety.

“Hurrah!” cried Rose, as the first ant reached the rug; but she stopped
suddenly. “Look at him!” she cried. “He is going _back_!”

Sure enough, back he was going,--back to the burning log. And all the
other ants were doing the same thing. One after another they returned
up the fire-escape, stopping to wave their feelers and make signs to
all the ants whom they met coming down. They must have told these last
something to make them change their minds; for every single one turned
about as soon as he was told. Presently it was plain what they meant.
The ants were coming out in crowds, and each was carrying something
white in its mouth.

“The ant babies! They are trying to save the ant babies!” cried Rose.
And that is exactly what they were doing. Eagerly the children watched
the crowds running down the fire-escape with their precious burdens.
Faster and faster they came, and the hearthrug was black with them when
Papa took it up gently and carried it out to shake it over the piazza
railing. How glad the poor little ants must have been to feel the cool
grass under their feet!

They were all saved at last, and it was high time, for the log was now
one mass of flame.

“I think you should have a fireman’s medal for life-saving, Rose,” said
her mother.

“Oh, _I_ ought not to have a medal,” said Rose modestly. “I only built
the fire-escape. But every one of those brave ants who came back into
the fire and saved the babies ought to have one.”

“Yes, we should call them Heroes if they had been men,” said Papa.

“They would rather have something sweet than a medal,” said Kenneth,
who knew a great deal about sweet things.

“Sure enough!” cried Rose, clapping her hands. “Mama, may I scatter
some sugar out there in the grass where Papa shook the ants?”

Her mother said that she might. So I dare say the rescued ants had a
jolly banquet that night to celebrate their wonderful escape. But I
suppose that the ant babies were too little to share in it.




CHAPTER IV

BEECH HOUSE


Bright and early the next morning a small procession came up the path
to Sweetbrier Cottage. It was the little Prouts, making their first
real visit to the Thornton children. Tom and Mary led the way. It was
the second time they had come that morning. Once, before daylight, they
had traveled over the same path to bring the milk for Kenneth’s and
Rose’s breakfast. But they did not mind an extra walk of a mile or two.
Behind Mary and Tom came Susan, holding little Jane by the hand, and
after them trotted Bill and Bob. The three girls carried each a doll,
dressed in her prettiest clothes.

It was a great event for the little Prouts. They were rather frightened
when they found the piazza empty and no one anywhere to be seen. They
had hoped that Kenneth and Rose would be outside waiting for them. That
would have made them a little less bashful. They did not know what to
do next, so they gathered in a bunch and began to whisper.

“You must knock on the door, Tom,” said Mary.

“No, _you_ do it,” said Tom, hanging back.

“Let’s all go together, then,” whispered Mary, looking timidly at the
front steps; for she remembered how once she had been frightened at
this same place by the ringing of a terrible bell. So all the little
Prouts took hold of hands and advanced in a crowd. But just as they
were going to mount the steps the door swung open, and out came Mrs.
Thornton with the baby in her arms. From the window she had seen the
little Prouts coming. She smiled at them kindly and said,--

“Good-morning, little neighbors. I am very glad to see you. I suppose
you are looking for Kenneth and Rose, aren’t you? Well, they are
expecting you, and they are waiting down under the beech tree. Come,
and I will show you the way.”

[Illustration: THE LITTLE PROUTS COME TO MAKE THEIR FIRST CALL]

They followed Mrs. Thornton down the green slope, around big rocks and
under the pine trees on top of the cliff, until they came to a huge
beech tree, the only one on the Island.

“This is the place,” said Mrs. Thornton. The little Prouts could dimly
see somebody moving about beyond the green wall of leaves. But no one
came to meet them. “We must let them know that we are here,” explained
Mrs. Thornton, and she pulled down a branch of the beech tree which was
in front of her. On the end dangled a tin horn.

“This is the way visitors do when they come to Beech House,” she said.
Then she blew a long blast on the horn. “Now a little one for the
baby,” she added, blowing again, very softly. “There, Tommy, now it is
your turn. You must each blow, so that they may know how many guests to
expect.”

Tommy blew the horn so loudly that Mrs. Thornton jumped. Then Mary
blew, then Susan, and Bill, and Bob. Last of all, little Jane blew. But
she scarcely made any sound at all.

When the echo of all these blowings had died away, Kenneth and Rose
lifted up the branch and looked out.

“Welcome, eight strangers!” said Kenneth, bowing very low.

“Welcome to Beech House,” said Rose, making a neat courtesy. Then they
led their visitors in,--all but Mrs. Thornton and the baby, who said
they must go back to the house.

The little Prouts followed Kenneth and Rose into Beech House, and a
fine house it was! The great beech tree arched over like an enormous
umbrella. On every side the branches came down close to the ground, so
that the children were shut in by green walls, like a tent. This was
Rose’s summer-house, where her dolls lived. Kenneth often played here,
too.

The little Prouts stared around them with grins of delight. Beech House
was all ready for a party. In the centre of the room stood a little
table, spread with a cloth and set with dishes for eight people. About
it were several little chairs. Over in the corner was another table,
even tinier, and set with still smaller dishes. At the head of this
table sat Alice, Rose’s best doll, and beside her was Matilda, with the
broken nose, whom Rose loved almost as dearly as she loved Alice.

“We thought we would have a party,” said Kenneth, “because this is the
first time you ever came to see us.”

“And, of course, the dolls had to have another party to welcome your
dolls,” added Rose. “Come, Alice, and greet your little new friends.”

Rose brought Alice forward, and she shook hands with the three dolls
which Mary, Susan, and little Jane had brought. Now these were the
very same dolls which Rose had sent to the little Prouts in the
Christmas box, before she had ever spoken a word to Mary or Susan or
Jane. So Rose was really better acquainted with the dolls, and with
their dresses which she had made, than she was with the Prout girls
themselves.

“How do you do? How do you do? How do you do?” said Alice three times
(in Rose’s voice). “Come and sit down at the table near my dear sister
Matilda, who has only one leg, so that she cannot rise to greet you
very conveniently.”

Then the Teddy Bear was introduced. Rose loved him too, but in a
different way. He wore a red sweater and a tam-o’-shanter cap. He shook
hands with the Prout dolls very politely, and squeaked “How!” like an
Indian. The little Prouts had never before seen a Teddy Bear, and at
first they were afraid of him, because they thought he was alive. Rose
put Teddy at the foot of the table, as he was the only boy in the party.

When Teddy and the five dolls were seated at their table, Rose and the
other little girls went back to where Kenneth was showing the boys his
camera and his tool-chest.

“Let’s play Desert Island,” said Kenneth. “That is our favorite game.
I am Robinson Crusoe and Rose is my Man Friday. Let’s play you are the
Swiss Family Robinson, come to have dinner with us. One, two, three,
four, five, six,--yes, you are just the right number! You can be Mr.
and Mrs. Robinson and their four sons. Isn’t that splendid, Rose?”

“Splendid!” echoed Rose, clapping her hands. “Mr. and Mrs. Robinson,
will you and your children please be seated?”

There were only four chairs, and these were rather small ones. So
Kenneth and Tom, Mary and Rose, sat cross-legged on the ground. Their
chins came just above the edge of the table, which made everybody laugh.

“Now, Man Friday,” said Robinson Crusoe, “bring on the banquet.”

Friday ran to the little cupboard in the corner. It was such a cunning
little cupboard that Mary said: “Oh, how did you ever think of building
one like that? It is so easy, too!”

“My Mama used to make them so when she was a little girl,” said Rose.
“She showed me how. See, it is just two bricks with a shingle laid
across; then two more bricks on top, and another shingle; and up,
up, up, as many shelves as you like. I have seven, and they are very
convenient.”

“We must build one in the wigwam,” said Mary.

“Yes; that must be your Swiss Family Robinson house, if this is our
Crusoe one,” said Kenneth.

Then Man Friday served the party. There was bread and butter spread
with marmalade, and there were cookies and chocolate fudge, and
lemonade in a tall pitcher. It was a very jolly party. Every one was
happy. The Prouts laughed all the time. You see, it was their very
first party!

When the Crusoe dinner was over, Kenneth had still more things to show
the Prout boys, and the girls were just as much interested. There was
the express wagon, in which the provisions had been drawn down from
Sweetbrier Cottage. But in places where the path was too narrow, they
had been obliged to carry it over the rocks in their arms. Rose told
how they had tipped over and wasted one whole pitcher of lemonade!

Then there was the ring-toss game and the animal circus. How the little
Prouts did enjoy the jointed animals, and the clown, and the funny
things which Kenneth and Rose made them do! Fancy it! the little Prouts
had never seen a real circus! Kenneth and Rose could hardly believe how
any one could be so unfortunate. But the little Prouts said that they
had never been away from the Island, and of course the circus never
came to the Island, it was so far away from everywhere.

Rose and Kenneth said to themselves that, after all, there are some
unfortunate things about living on an island.




CHAPTER V

MUTINY


While the little ones were still playing with the clown, the elephant,
and the donkey, Mary and Tom went about Beech House looking at other
things.

“What a queer flag!” cried Mary suddenly. “It is not a bit like the
Stars and Stripes.” She was pointing to something tied to a stick which
stood against the tree-trunk. It was a flag of black silk, and on it
was painted a skull with two bones crossed below it.

“Why, don’t you know?” said Kenneth, “that is a pirate flag. We always
use it whenever we play pirates.”

“What are pirates?” asked Mary.

“Oh, pirates are sea-robbers,” explained Kenneth. “They used to sail
all around the world in fast ships, and they captured other sailors
and killed them. Then they took their treasures and buried them in
places where no one else could find them. Papa says that perhaps they
hid some of their treasure down here in Maine. Did you ever find any
pirate gold, Tom?”

“No,” said Tom. “But I never looked for any. Perhaps if I had known I
might have found it. I’ll hunt for it some day.”

“We’ll all hunt for it!” said Kenneth.

“We played ‘Buried Treasure’ last summer,” said Rose. “Aunt Clare
showed me how. It is a very good game for a sandy beach, and I found
ten cents.”

“Oh!” cried Susan Prout eagerly. Ten cents seemed to her a great deal
of money.

“Pooh!” said Kenneth. “That was a silly game. We will go and find real
treasure,--gold and jewels and things like that. And we will be rich as
anything.”

“Hurrah!” shouted Tom. Bill and Bob echoed, “Hurrah!”

“First we’ll form a pirate band,” went on Kenneth. “Now there are so
many of us it will be jolly to play pirate. I’ll be Bloody Dick. Tom,
you can be Slippery Joe. We will think up names for all the little
ones,--and for the girls, too. The girls will have to play so that we
can have a good big band.”

“Of course we shall play!” said Rose stoutly. “We shall be the best
pirates of all, shan’t we, Mary?”

And Mary said, “Perhaps, when we know how.”

“I say, Tom, you know where the pirate cave is, don’t you?” asked
Kenneth.

“You mean the cave down by Black Rock?” asked Tom. “We don’t call it
that, though. We call it just ‘The Oven.’”

“Pirate Cave is a much better name,” said Kenneth. “Well, Mama says
that we can have a picnic there some day. We children will all be
pirates, and the cave is our den. Papa and Mama and the baby will
be just ordinary sailors with a treasure,--that’s the luncheon, of
course. And we will capture them and take them to the cave. Then we
will have the picnic. Won’t that be fine?”

“Fine!” cried Tom. “That will be a great game.”

“We must all have black masks like this,” said Kenneth; and he clapped
to his face a bit of black cloth with two holes, through which his eyes
glowed fiercely.

The littlest Prouts began to scream. “Stop that!” said Tom. “If you
are going to bawl you can’t be pirates. You will have to go with the
luncheon and be robbed.”

Bill and Bob and Jane were silent immediately. They felt that it would
be terrible not to be pirates.

“Yes, we must all have masks and swords, and red handkerchiefs tied
around our necks, and turbans, just like real pirates,” said Kenneth.
“See, I have a tin sword.”

“I think I can make the masks,” said Mary, who had been examining
Kenneth’s. “I can sew a little, can’t you, Rose?”

“Oh, yes,” said Rose, thinking of the dolls’ dresses which she had
made. “I can sew a great deal.”

“And I can whittle,” said Tommy Prout. “I will make wooden swords for
all of us.”

“So can I,” said Kenneth. “I have a jolly jack-knife--a real pirate
ripper!” and he flourished it in the air.

“Who will be captain?” said Rose suddenly. “I suppose there has to be a
captain?”

“Oh, yes,” said Kenneth. “Of course there must be a captain, to tell
everybody what to do.”

“_You_ be captain, Kenneth,” said Rose, who admired her brother more
than anything in the world. Kenneth brandished his sword and cried
“Ho!” ferociously, as though he were indeed a pirate chief.

“Tommy is the biggest,” said Susan jealously.

“Yes, Tommy’s the biggest,” echoed Bill and Bob.

“Well, I know the Island pretty well,” said Tom. “I can sail a boat,
too. I guess I’ll make a good pirate, though I never played the game
before.”

“But the captain ought to know all about it,” said Kenneth uneasily.
“You know you had never heard about pirates until I told you.”

“Well, I know _now_,” said Tommy, flushing; “so what’s the difference?
Do you want to be everything?”

“No, I don’t!” retorted Kenneth. “Yesterday I let you be the Indian
chief.”

“Yes, but you were Hawkeye, the famous hunter. That was just as good,
wasn’t it?” answered Tom.

“Well, if any one else is the pirate chief, I shall not let him wear my
sword,” declared Kenneth.

“Stingy!” said Susan.

“I’ll whittle a better one!” Tom cried triumphantly.

“I’m going home,” said Susan. “I shan’t play unless Tom is the chief.”

“Go along, then!” said Rose, pouting.

Little Jane began to cry. Bill and Bob doubled up their fists and
looked very fierce.

“Oh, don’t let us quarrel!” said Mary, in distress. And, indeed, it
looked as though there was to be trouble in Beech House.

“Let’s go home, Mary,” said Tom sullenly. “We aren’t wanted here any
longer.”

Kenneth stood with arms folded, kicking the grass sulkily. Suddenly
there came a tremendous blow on the horn,--so loud that everybody
jumped, and Rose whispered in blood-curdling tones the awful word
“_Pirates!_” But Kenneth soon remembered who he was, and that Robinson
Crusoe was never afraid of anything, not even of cannibals.

“What ho!” he called bravely. “What stranger seeks entrance to my
house?” and he strode to the door brandishing his sword. Suddenly he
gave a whoop of joy.

“Charlie!” he cried. “Charlie Carroll! Where did you come from?”

“It’s a surprise!” said another voice, and in came Kenneth with a boy
of about the same age, who was grinning all over his jolly freckled
face. Rose flew at him rapturously.

“Cousin Charlie!” she squealed. “Oh, how nice!”

“Hello, Rose!” the boy said. “Having a party?”

“They are the little Prouts,” whispered Rose. “You remember, we told
you about them.”

“He is my cousin, Charlie Carroll,” explained Kenneth to the Prout
children. “I say, Charlie, why didn’t you tell us you were coming? Are
you going to stay?”

“Yes, I have come to stay four weeks,” said Charlie. “Aunt Mollie asked
me, and it was to be a secret.”

“Oh, goodie, goodie!” cried Rose, hopping up and down. “What fine times
we shall have now!”

“I came up on the boat last night with Aunt Clare,” said Charlie.
“Uncle Jack met us at the wharf this morning, and when Aunt Mollie
said you kids were all down here I ran away and came as softly as I
could so as to surprise you.”

“Aunt Clare here, too! Oh, what fun!” cried Rose.

“You came just in time to be a pirate,” said Kenneth.

“Oh, yes! you will be a pirate too, won’t you, Charlie?” said Rose,
clapping her hands.

“Pirates!” cried Charlie. “That sounds fine. I’ll be Bulldog Bill.”

“Hurrah!” cheered Kenneth. “We are to have swords and masks, Charlie,
and capture a treasure and live in a cave.”

“But we haven’t chosen a captain yet,” said Rose. “Kenneth and Tom both
want to be captain, and we nearly quarreled about it before you came.”

The children suddenly looked very much ashamed. “I don’t want to be
captain, Tom,” said Kenneth. “You’ll do it better. Here, you can have
my sword.”

“No,” said Tom, “I won’t take it. You be captain. You know all about
the game and I don’t.”

Then Mary Prout had a great idea. “_You_ be pirate chief,” she said,
turning to Charlie. “That will settle the trouble.”

“Oh, yes, that is a good idea!” cried Rose. “We will all do as you say,
Charlie.”

“Oh, I have just come,” said Charlie. “I don’t want to be chief the
very first thing.”

“I’ll agree,” said Kenneth. “What do you say, Tom?”

“All right,” assented Tom. “I don’t care. He’ll make a good pirate, I
guess.”

“Of course he will!” cried Rose promptly. “Charlie is great fun.”

“Well, I’ll tell you,” said Charlie modestly. “I’ll be captain first,
so as to settle things easily. But after that we’ll take turns. Now
let’s plan what we will do first.”

“All right!” they cried in chorus. Then they sat down on the grass and
told Charlie about the adventure which they had planned before he came.
And the new captain said it was a very good plan indeed, and that they
would carry it out at the first chance.

So the tea-party ended happily after all, and a mutiny among the pirate
band was averted.




CHAPTER VI

THE PIRATE CAVE


One morning, a week after the tea-party, Mr. and Mrs. Thornton and Aunt
Clare went for a row on the water. They had two large baskets packed
full to overflowing with something precious. They also took a stone jug
and a coffee-pot. It looked like a picnic party. They were very merry,
as if they expected to have a pleasant time; and yet, it may be that
they had some idea of the danger into which they were about to run, for
they did not take the baby with them.

There was no one in sight when they rowed away from the landing. This
was strange; for usually there were half a dozen children, more or
less, in that neighborhood. Quite recently stories had been told about
a band of pirates who had been seen prowling about the coast. Was it
possible that these ruffians had anything to do with the children’s
disappearance? Mr. and Mrs. Thornton seemed, however, to have forgotten
all about pirate stories, and they rowed merrily away.

“Why, this might indeed be a desert island,” said Aunt Clare, as they
rounded point after point with no sign of a house or a human being.
They passed several little coves and cliffs, the bathing beach and the
chasm, and presently they came in sight of a larger cove with a flat,
stony beach. Beyond this a rock extended out into the water like a
platform. At the back rose a steep cliff, with a black cavity in the
centre.

“There is the cave, up under that rock,” said Mr. Thornton, as the boat
grated on the beach.

“Oh, what a splendid place for a picnic!” cried Aunt Clare, jumping out
lightly. “Do be careful not to upset those baskets; I am dreadfully
hungry already, and I don’t want to lose a mouthful of the delicious
luncheon which Mollie has prepared.”

Mr. Thornton helped out his wife and pulled the empty boat up on the
beach, where the tide could not wash it away. “Now, then,” said he,
“I’ll take the pail of lobsters and one of the baskets. Mama, you
can take the other basket. Clare, will you carry the jug and the
coffee-pot, please? Forward, march! To the cave!”

Aunt Clare began to hum a tune, and they all marched along in time
to it, carrying the luncheon carefully; but just as they were about
to enter the cave there came a terrible sound,--a chorus of screams
and shouts and shrill whistles,--and a band of fierce and desperate
ruffians came rushing out of the cave where they had been hidden,
surrounding the unfortunate picnickers.

These desperadoes were very dreadful to look at. They wore black masks
covering all their faces except their eyes, and some of them had long,
black beards. They carried swords and pistols, which they brandished in
a very dangerous manner. One of them waved a fearful black flag, with
a skull and crossbones painted upon it.

“Pirates!” gasped Aunt Clare. “We are lost!”

“Pirates we are!” shouted the leader of the band, in a terrible voice.
“What are you doing near our cave? I am Bloody Dick, and you are our
prisoners. Hand over your treasure and come along to our captain,
Bulldog Bill. Then we’ll see what will happen to you next!”

There was nothing to do but yield, for the pirates were eight to
three. Mr. and Mrs. Thornton quickly handed over their baskets and the
pail,--Aunt Clare groaned when she saw these treasures seized by the
pirates. Then, after a struggle, she herself was forced to give up the
jug and the coffee-pot. Bloody Dick and Slippery Joe, the biggest of
the band, tied the hands of the prisoners with a piece of rope, while
the others danced about shouting and screaming more like wild Indians
than like pirates.

[Illustration: THE PIRATES ATTACK THE PICNIC PARTY]

“Now come along!” growled Bloody Dick, “and step lively, or the Captain
will make you all walk the plank.”

“What’s ‘walk the plank’?” whispered one of the pirates in pigtails to
another with long, yellow curls.

“Charlie says that it is like the spring-board which the boys use in
swimming,” answered the curly pirate. “But that doesn’t sound very
terrible, does it?”

“No,” said the pigtailed one. “But perhaps there is something more.”

The procession marched up the rocks to the entrance of the cave, led by
Bloody Dick, who held the end of the rope which bound all the prisoners
together, while Slippery Joe guarded the rear. One by one the prisoners
were pushed in, bent almost double, for the opening was low. But once
inside, they found a high room, big enough to hold them all. It was
shadowy but not very dark, for besides the door there was a hole which
went up through the roof like a chimney.

“Oh, what a fine cave!” cried Aunt Clare, forgetting that she was a
prisoner.

“Sh!” warned Bloody Dick. Kenneth looked so fierce in a tarpaulin hat
and long rubber boots, with his belt stuck full of Fourth-of-July
pistols, that Aunt Clare almost trembled. “Silence, till our Captain
speaks!” he commanded.

There was no captain in sight, but presently there was a sound of
scratching, puffing, snorting in the chimney. The pirate captain, like
Santa Claus, was coming down from the roof.

There was a slip and a rattle of stones, and with a thump he tumbled
into the middle of the cave. It was not quite the entrance he had
planned, and the first word of the chief was an “Ow!” of pain. For a
minute he did not rise, but sat rubbing some injured spot upon his
person. Then he reached for his sword, which he had lost in the fall,
and sprang fiercely to his feet, a majestic figure (Charlie was a tall
boy for ten years).

The pirate chief wore a great slouch hat pulled down over his mask,
below which hung a beard of curly black wool. A yellow handkerchief
was knotted about his throat. He wore a red sweater, with a skull and
crossbones on the breast, fringed leggings, and his belt bristled with
knives, daggers, and pistols, to say nothing of the huge tin sword
which he brandished fiercely. He truly was a terrible figure. Little
Jane trembled and clung close to Sue when he hissed through his teeth:--

“Well, my hearties, whom have we here? Bulldog Bill thirsts for
vengeance and for gold!”

“Captain,” said Bloody Dick, “these are land-lubbers who were coming
to our cave. We have captured them and their treasure, which looks
valuable. What shall we do with them?”

“Let the prisoners die,” said the captain, in a blood-curdling voice.
“Let them walk the plank; but we will keep the treasure.”

With a scream Aunt Clare threw herself on her knees before the pirate
captain. “Oh, good Captain Bulldog,” she said, “spare us! we are so
young and innocent. One of us has a dear little baby at home who will
feel so sad to lose us! Take our treasure, if you will, but spare
our lives. Yonder coffee-pot is solid tin, and so are the knives and
spoons. Let such a prize content you!”

Aunt Clare pretended to cry so pitifully that the three smallest
pirates began to boohoo with sympathy, until Slippery Dick whispered:--

“Sh! You kids! She’s only pretending. Don’t you know it’s all play?”

Bulldog Bill listened to the prisoner’s words, but shook his head. “It
is not enough,” he said. “What will you do for us besides?”

“We will be your slaves,” said Aunt Clare. “We will prepare your
dinner.”

Still the captain shook his head. “Can’t you do something else?” he
asked.

Aunt Clare had an idea. “I will tell you a story,” she said.

“Ha! that is good!” exclaimed the captain. “You shall tell us a tale,
but it must be one that we have never heard before. If you do this we
will set you free.”

“Give me time to think, and I will promise to tell you a tale which you
never heard before,” said Aunt Clare.

“Very good,” growled Bulldog Bill. “Loose the prisoners’ bonds so that
they can prepare our meal. But guard them well so that they cannot
escape.”

Bloody Dick and Slippery Joe untied the prisoners’ hands, while the
other pirates guarded the entrance of the cave.

“Now, then,” said the pirate captain, “we are hungry. Let us dine at
once. Prisoners, prepare the food!”

“It is too early for luncheon,” said Mrs. Thornton. But the pirates
began to clamor. Aunt Clare sided with them.

“Let them have their way,” she begged. “Hungry pirates are very
dangerous! Besides, I confess that I am half starved myself.”

“Well, then, we must have a fire,” said Mrs. Thornton. “Who will
gather wood for the fire?”

“Let the four youngest pirates do that,” said the captain. So Jane,
Bill, Bob, and Rose went out to hunt for driftwood on the beach.
Presently they were running in and out like ants, bringing it by
armfuls.

“We must have water,” said Mrs. Thornton. “Who will go to the spring
for it?”

“Let me go,” said Sue.

“No, the jug will be heavy. Let Slippery Joe fetch the water,”
commanded the captain. So Slippery Joe went forth. “We others will
examine the treasure,” said the captain. The remaining four, Charlie,
Kenneth, Mary, and Sue, sat down on the ground and began to unpack the
baskets which had come in the boat. And as they unwrapped one after
another of the good things, they smacked their lips and squealed with
delight. They were so interested in the treasure that they forgot all
about their prisoners. But suddenly they heard a shout from outside the
cave:--

“Catch him! He’s running away!”

The pirates jumped to their feet. Mrs. Thornton was bending over the
fire, doing things with the coffee-pot, and Aunt Clare was taking the
lobsters to pieces. But Mr. Thornton had disappeared.

Bulldog Bill and his men rushed to the door echoing the shout of
“Catch him! catch him!” When they were outside they saw the four other
pirates racing along the beach towards the spot where the runaway
was disappearing over the top of the cliff. The whole band started
in pursuit, leaving Mama and Aunt Clare quite alone; so that these
prisoners might have escaped, too, had they tried. But they were so
interested in preparing dinner that they forgot all about it. Just like
women!

After a long time the pirates returned, flushed, panting, and tired,
but without their prisoner.

“Papa ran so fast we could not catch him,” explained Rose to her Mama.
“He ran away into the woods, and we couldn’t find him. Oh, Mama! I’m
afraid now he won’t be here for dinner!” Rose looked distressed.

“Silence, Burly Ben!” said the captain sternly. “This is no fit talk
for one of Bulldog Bill’s bloody band!--My! how good that cocoa smells!
Is dinner almost ready, Aunt Clare? I never was so hungry in my life.
Can’t I have just one little lobster claw to chew?”

Aunt Clare had not spread the tablecloth in the cave, for that would
have been too dark and too crowded for every one to be comfortable. But
the flat rock out in front of the cave made a fine table, with room for
every one to sit cross-legged around it in pirate fashion. Each person
had a big, round scallop-shell for a plate, with a tin cup of cocoa
beside it, and such a lovely luncheon was spread on the white cloth as
the little Prouts at least had never before seen. They all sat down
together, prisoners and pirates, and the pirates forgot for a time that
they were anything but hungry girls and boys.

“It is too bad that Papa isn’t here,” said Mrs. Thornton.

“Too bad!” echoed Kenneth and Rose sorrowfully.

But before many minutes they heard a sound of some one scrambling down
the cliff close by, and presently Mr. Thornton himself crept sheepishly
up to the group.

“Please, Mr. Pirate Captain,” he said, “may I come back to dinner? When
I ran away I forgot about Aunt Clare’s story. I don’t mind starving to
death, as I came very near doing on this desert island, but I could not
bear to lose the story. Let me dine and hear the tale, then I will walk
the plank gladly.”

“Have you any ransom?” asked the pirate chief, taking a huge bite of
sandwich.

Mr. Thornton slapped his pockets doubtfully. Then his face brightened.
“Yes! I do happen to have one bit of treasure about me which you
did not take away,” he said. “You forgot, I think, to go through my
pockets.”

He drew out a bag of peanuts and handed it to Bulldog Bill, then seized
a sandwich in each hand. “Fair exchange!” he cried. The children set up
a shout of delight.

“It is a good treasure,” said Bulldog Bill approvingly, as he helped
himself.

“I would have starved rather than eat them,” said Mr. Thornton, with
a sad voice. “I bought them as a present for my innocent children at
home. But since I have fallen into the power of this pirate crew you
must do with them as you think best.”

Now the pirates knew what it was best to do with peanuts; and they
did it. When every one had eaten all he possibly could, the captain
suddenly remembered that he was a pirate. He put on his tarpaulin hat,
and seizing his sword, said sternly to Aunt Clare:--

“It is now time for the story. Prisoner, begin; but beware how you tell
us one which we have heard before. If it is a chestnut you shall die.”

“Fierce Captain,” said Aunt Clare, “did you ever hear the tale called
‘The Pirate Hoard’?”

“No,” said Captain Bulldog, “I never did. Has any one here ever heard
this tale?” And every one answered, “No!”

“I thought not,” said Aunt Clare.

“Very good,” said the captain; “go on with the story.”

And this is the story which Aunt Clare told.




CHAPTER VII

THE PIRATE HOARD


This is a story of Captain Kidd, who was, you know, the greatest pirate
of them all in old times.

One day this terrible fellow was cruising about in these very waters,
with a ship full of gold and jewels and precious things which he
had stolen. You see, he wanted to find a new place in which to bury
this particular treasure. He was always hiding things. He buried his
different hoards all along the coast from Maine to Mexico, just as
squirrels hide their nuts wherever it is convenient. You can scarcely
find any place, however tiny, which has not a story that Captain Kidd’s
treasure is buried somewhere near. Like the squirrels, Captain Kidd
often went away and forgot about his treasure, and never returned to
dig it up.

Well, Captain Kidd was cruising along this coast, with his ship full
of treasure. He had been enjoying great luck on his last voyage. That
means, of course, that a great many other people had been most unlucky.
In those days about the unluckiest thing that could happen to anybody
was to meet Captain Kidd on the high seas. Pirates were such greedy,
cruel fellows,--I beg your pardon! I forgot that nearly every one here
is a pirate. How careless of me!

Captain Kidd was a long way from shore when he ran into a fog,--a
thick Maine fog; the kind that Islanders know so well. It was so thick
that one could scarcely see a ship’s length ahead. All of a sudden the
pirate lookout called to the captain:--

“Sail ahead!” and sure enough! out of the fog loomed a sailing vessel,
so near that the two bowsprits were almost touching.

Now, this stranger was a fishing-boat named the Mary Ann. She was a
Maine fishing-boat, like your father’s, Tom Prout, and she was on her
way home from the Banks with a cargo of fish. The captain, whose name
was Tobey, was frightened out of his wits when he saw the black flag
flying at the mast of Captain Kidd’s vessel. Of course, he knew what
this meant. If he were captured by the pirate ship he should never see
his home and dear little children again. So he put about, and the Mary
Ann scuttled away for dear life, without stopping to say “Howdy.”

When Captain Kidd saw the other boat go about, he grinned a dreadful
grin and said,--

“Oho! You are running away, are you? Well, that must mean that you have
some precious treasure aboard. Let’s after them, my hearties, and give
them a chase.”

You see, he was greedy as well as cruel. Already he had more treasure
than he knew what to do with, but he longed for more. This was just
like a pirate--I beg your pardon, Captain Bulldog! I forgot again.

Now began an exciting chase through the fog. The little Mary Ann was
a fast boat, and for a time she kept ahead of the pirate ship, which
could barely see her scudding like a sea-gull through the fog. But
finally poor Captain Tobey saw that the pirate ship was gaining on him,
and his heart sank. Alas! what could he do? He thought of his children
at home, and the tears filled his eyes.

Suddenly he had an idea! He knew every rock and shoal in the bay, which
was full of rocks and shoals. He remembered that there must be a reef
close by, a reef which came almost to the surface of the sea. Until
one was quite close he would not see it, hidden by this fog. Captain
Tobey steered straight for the place where he knew that reef must be,
straight to a froth of white foam.

The pirate ship followed where he led and came on, gaining every
minute. Now Captain Tobey held his breath. They were in the waves
that broke upon the reef! But the Mary Ann went safely over without
touching, because she was so small. And the big vessel flying the black
flag came close after her.

_Crash! Smash!_ “Hurrah!” came a shout from the Mary Ann. “Hurrah!
Good-by!” The pirate ship was stuck fast on the reef, and the waves
were beating her to pieces. But Captain Tobey did not wait to see what
happened. He was too eager to get home to his wife and babies. The Mary
Ann disappeared silently through the fog, scudding towards a harbor
miles away.

But there was excitement indeed on board the pirate ship. The pirates
went running to and fro, shouting and waving their arms, crazy with
fear. They tumbled into the long boats as fast as they could, without
thinking anything about their treasure, only of their precious lives.
But Captain Kidd was different. He cared more for his treasure than for
anything.

“The mate and I will shift for ourselves!” he shouted. “Leave my boat!”
He knew he could not save everything, there was such a vast deal of
gold and silver and heavy plate in the ship. But he ran to his own
cabin and brought out a little wooden box bound in iron. It was full
of the most precious treasure of all,--diamonds and rubies, sapphires
and emeralds, and precious stones of every color.

With this chest under his cloak he got into the boat, and his mate,
One-Eyed Pete, rowed him away. The fog was so thick that they soon lost
sight of the other boat. A storm was rising; the wind blew so loud
and the waves roared so terribly that they could not hear any answer
to their calls. They had to be very careful of the rocks and reefs on
which the waves broke fiercely, and they rowed on and on for hours
before they found a place where they could land.

But at last they came to a safer shore, with an inlet and a smooth
beach. They landed, and soon discovered that this was a very little
desert island.

“This will be just the place to bury the treasure,” said Captain Kidd.
“Let us do so before we meet any one who may try to take it from us.”

“Right, Captain,” growled One-Eyed Pete.

So they dug a hole in the ground and buried the treasure, heaping a
little mound over it. They knew that they should remember the spot,
because there was close beside it a great big rock split open and lying
in two pieces side by side, like a huge book spread flat upon its back.

Captain Kidd wrote down in his note-book a description of the place,
and, as well as he knew, how they had come there. He drew besides a
picture of the fog as a sample, so that he should recognize it again.
For he said,--“I never saw such fog before, in all my life!” Which
proves that all this must have happened close by where we are now.

Then One-Eyed Pete said,--“Cap’n, a terrible storm is coming on, and
I think this here island is a poor place to be on; for the waves will
roll right over it. Let’s row to the mainland, which can’t be far away.”

So they rowed away again, and after a long time spent in trying to find
a landing-place, they came to a harbor and a village. They pretended
that they were shipwrecked sailors, so the good people took them in and
gave them food. What would they have thought had they known it was the
wicked Captain Kidd who was visiting them!

The storm lasted several days, but when it was over Captain Kidd said
“good-by” politely, and with One-Eyed Pete went out on the first
fishing-boat that left the harbor. Nobody discovered who they were.
They exchanged passage into the first vessel they met, and were soon
far over the seas.

After that Captain Kidd lived to have many wild adventures, and he
forgot all about his treasure in the little iron-bound box on the
desert Island. No one ever heard of the other pirates, who must have
been drowned in the storm that night. The pirate ship went to pieces,
and some bits of the treasure were washed ashore with its timbers, and
the fishermen’s children found them on the beach. But it is not known
that any one ever found the captain’s jewels, and I dare say the box
is there to this day. Just think, if only one could find it!

       *       *       *       *       *

Aunt Clare ended her story with a sigh, echoed by all the little girls.
“I wish I had some diamonds now,” said Rose wistfully.

“Oh, so do I,--and rubies!” cried Mary.

“Is that all?” asked Kenneth and Charlie, in one breath.

“Is it true?” demanded Tom eagerly.

“’Course it is true,” cried Charlie. “Didn’t you ever hear of Captain
Kidd?”

“I don’t know for certain that it is all true,” said Aunt Clare, “but
it _might_ be. There were pirates who buried their treasure in desert
islands. Why, I’ve heard the fishermen of this very place tell that
there was treasure buried around here somewhere. No one knows where.”

“It might be this very same treasure!” cried Kenneth, “mightn’t it,
Aunt Clare?”

“I suppose it might,” she answered, laughing.

The boys exchanged eager looks. They did not say anything about it
then, but they each knew that they were resolved to find that pirate
treasure if it was anywhere near the Island.

As for the little girls, they were helping to pack up the lunch
baskets; for the released prisoners were now ready to go home, and some
of the pirates were going with them.




CHAPTER VIII

TREASURE TROVE


One morning, about a week later, three of the pirates--Tom, Charlie,
and Kenneth--got into a dory and rowed away from the harbor. It was
Tom’s own boat, of which he was very proud. He had spent all his life
near and in and on the water, and he was a splendid boatman. Mr.
Thornton was not afraid to let the children go with him in his dory,
but he made them promise that never more than two should go with Tom at
one time.

The pirates had with them in the boat three spades; they looked very
sly, as though they were upon a secret errand. Tom was the leader in
this adventure, and he seemed to know just where to go. They rowed
around the Point and then straight out into the bay towards a little
rocky island, beyond the other islands. They followed the shore of it
until they came to an inlet with a smooth beach beyond.

“This is the place,” said Tom, jumping out and pulling up the boat.
“Come on, fellows!”

He raced up the beach followed by the other two, and climbed a bank.
At the top was a spring of cool, clear water under a tree, and close
beside it was a huge rock.

“Look at that!” cried Tom, pointing at the rock. “What do you think of
that?”

The rock was split into two flat pieces, each almost square, which lay
side by side. It looked like a great book spread open.

“It is the very rock that Aunt Clare told about in the story!” cried
Charlie.

“Where is the mound?” asked Kenneth eagerly. “Oh, I see! This must be
it.”

Sure enough! Close beside the rock and near the spring the ground
swelled into a mound covered with grass.

“Of course this must be the place,” said Charlie excitedly. “How did
you ever find it, Tom?”

“Well, when she was telling the story I remembered this island, and I
thought it was just the place that the pirates would have come to first
when they drifted in from sea; so I rowed over to look at it. I found
the cove was just as she had said, and sure enough! there was the rock
like a big book, and the mound. I knew this must be the place. I wanted
to begin to dig right away, but I thought it wouldn’t be fair without
you fellows, ’cause you were the ones to tell me about pirates first.”

“Let’s begin to dig now,” said Kenneth eagerly.

“Let’s!” cried Charlie. So they ran down to the dory and got their
spades. Then they all fell to work.

The mound was not hard like ordinary earth. When they had gone through
the sod their spades struck something queer. Charlie took some of it
up in his hand. “Why, it’s broken shells,” he said.

“Clam shells!” exclaimed Kenneth, picking up two which were still
unbroken. “The pirates must have had clams for their dinner, and have
piled the shells on top of their treasure. Oh, hurry! this _proves_
there is something here, doesn’t it?”

Eagerly they set to work again. It was amazing to see what a number of
shells there were in that mound. It was made of nothing else. Down,
down they dug until they had a hole as large as Tom’s body. But still
there was no sign of any treasure. Their spades tossed up broken shells
and nothing more.

“My! Those two pirates must have had a big clambake all by themselves,”
said Charlie, pausing to wipe his streaming forehead.

“I suppose Captain Kidd was an awful eater,” said Kenneth. “But I say,
how could they finish so many clams?”

“Huh! I could eat half a barrel of steamed clams any day,” protested
Tom. “Those two pirates were regular cannibals, I expect. Besides,
they were eating on purpose to have shells enough to cover the
treasure, don’t you see?”

Once more they fell to work, and they dug for ten minutes without a
word. But presently, with a sigh, they all three stopped again. It was
a hot day and this was hard work.

“If we find the treasure we must give some to the girls,” said Kenneth.

“Of course,” agreed Tom. “They are pirates, too. The band will all have
to share.”

“Let’s give each of the others three diamonds and three rubies and
three sapphires and three emeralds,” said Charlie, with sudden
inspiration.

“All right,” agreed Tom and Kenneth. “And we’ll divide the rest equally
among us three,” added Kenneth.

Then they began work again. But still there was no sign of that
iron-bound box. Their arms were growing very tired. They were almost
ready to give it up. Suddenly Kenneth stooped and picked up something.

“Hello!” he said. “What’s this?”

It was a small pointed stone, flat on both sides. The other two boys
examined it eagerly. “Why, it looks like an Indian arrowhead,” said
Charlie; “but how came it here?”

“Perhaps the pirates used bows and arrows too,” suggested Tom.

“That’s it!” cried Kenneth. “I’m almost sure they did. I remember once
seeing an old picture of men fighting with bows and arrows, and they
were not Indians. They must have been pirates. Hurrah! I guess we are
near the treasure now!”

They dug down with new energy, tossing up the shell-earth like beavers.
Presently Charlie stooped. “I’ve found something too,” he said; “but I
don’t know what it is.” It was a curious round stone, hollow and smooth
in the middle.

In a few minutes Tom stooped also. “Here’s something else,” he said,
pulling out a very long, three-sided stone roughly sharpened on one
edge. “What do you suppose this is?”

“Maybe it is an anchor,” suggested Kenneth. But it did not look much
like an anchor. They worked for another ten minutes, then they stopped,
for nothing else came to light.

“I don’t think these are much,” said Charlie, kicking the stone things
with his foot. “I don’t believe there is anything else here. These old
shells go down and down,--to China, I guess. The pirates couldn’t have
eaten so many clams, you know. Let’s give it up.”

“Yes, let’s,” agreed Kenneth, tossing away his spade and sitting down
to rest. “I’m tired and I’m not going to dig any more.”

“Oh, come! Don’t give up so soon!” begged Tom. “I’m going to work
awhile longer.”

Charlie looked at his watch. “It is noon already,” he said. “I’m
hungry, and Aunt Mollie doesn’t like us to be late for dinner. Let’s
go home. There isn’t anything here but old stone things, and they are
no good.”

[Illustration: TOM, CHARLIE, AND KENNETH DIG FOR THE TREASURE]

“The pirates left them,” said Tom doggedly. “I’m going to work a little
longer. Say, will you fellows dig for ten minutes more? Then if we
don’t find anything I’ll agree to give it up.”

“All right,” said the other two.

Once more they set to work with tired arms. They dug and they dug
through the dust of broken clam shells, of which there seemed to be no
end. But still there was no sign of the iron-bound box. It was very
discouraging. All they found was a few more arrowheads and some knobby
stones with grooves about the top. They were hardly worth picking up,
it seemed. The boys tossed them aside in a little heap with the other
stone things. Then they threw down their spades, rubbing their aching
backs and arms. All these pains for nothing!

“It’s no use,” said Charlie. “There can’t be anything here. We shall
have to give it up.”

“It is long after dinner time. Perhaps we shan’t get any, and they will
scold us,” said Kenneth ruefully.

“Huh! Only a lot of old stone things!” growled Tom, kicking the heap
spitefully. “They aren’t worth taking home, are they?”

“Oh, yes! We must show them all to father. Perhaps he can tell us what
they are,” said Kenneth.

“Well, come on, then,” urged Charlie. “I wish we had gone an hour ago.
I hate cold dinners. Oh, what a wasted morning!”

Tom lingered wistfully. “It looks just like a treasure place,” he said,
“and I felt somehow as if we should find it here. There must be some
mistake.”

“Oh, come on, Tom!” called the others impatiently; and he hurried down
to the beach where they had carried the stone things. Soon they were
rowing back to their own island. But they were very silent and sulky
all the way. Their treasure hunt had not been a success, and they were
hungry and cross. Tom was the gloomiest of the three. He felt that
they blamed him for their disappointment. But it had mattered most to
him.

“I wanted to take home a handful of diamonds to Mary,” he said to
himself. “How pleased she would be! Then we would all be rich. But I
would give the handsomest diamond of all to Rose.”

Mr. Thornton was on the beach looking for them when they came in. He
had been greatly worried because they had been gone so long; but he did
not scold them when they told him what they had been doing.

“Tom thought that he had found Captain Kidd’s hiding-place, Papa,” said
Kenneth wearily. “It looked just like the mound that Aunt Clare told us
about; but there wasn’t any treasure at all, only some old stone things
in a heap of shells.”

“Stone things in a shell-heap?” asked Mr. Thornton, pricking up his
ears. “What do you mean by that?”

“We brought these home, Uncle Jack,” said Charlie, pulling out the
stone things from under the seat of the dory.

“Hello! Some good Indian arrowheads and sinkers; a stone mortar for
grinding corn; and this,--why! this is as fine an Indian plow as I ever
saw. Which of you found this, boys?” cried Mr. Thornton excitedly.

“Tom found that,” said Kenneth without envy.

“Well, Tom, I must buy this of you. Boys, you have found a treasure
indeed, though it is not the kind you were looking for. You must have
come upon an Indian shell-mound, and I dare say there are still more
things there to be discovered. But come now, you must be half starved.
I know Mama and Aunt Clare are very anxious,--I dare say Tom’s mother
is not the worrying kind. Let’s all go home and have some cold dinner.
Then we will look at your treasures again. Tom, you ought to be proud
of your morning’s work! I wish I had discovered that shell-mound
myself!”




CHAPTER IX

THE BOX OF CANDY


Although the boys had been disappointed in the kind of treasure which
they had found, the Indian relics proved a real treasure, after all.
The next day Mr. Thornton went over to the island with them, and they
brought back a few more stone things from the mound, but nothing so
fine as Tom’s plow. However, Mr. Thornton said that there might be
other interesting things there which they could dig up when they chose.

Mr. Thornton was so pleased with the boys’ discovery that he paid
Kenneth and Charlie each two dollars for their share of the treasure.
But he gave Tom five dollars to pay for his plow and for first
discovering the mound, which had once been an Indian picnic-place. He
said these relics should be used to start an Island museum, to match
the Island library. And perhaps some day they would find other things
to make the collection more complete.

Tom felt very rich indeed. He had never owned so much money in all his
life, and he could not decide what to do with it. There are so many
things which one can do with five dollars, especially if one is a boy.
But he resolved not to be in a hurry to spend it.

There was a famous professor staying at the hotel on the other end of
the Island, and one day Mr. Thornton said to Kenneth and Charlie:--

“Boys, I want to take your Indian relics over to the hotel and show
them to the Professor. I should like to know what he thinks of them.
Shall we get Tom and row around there?”

Of course, the boys were delighted to go. They had not been to the
hotel that summer, and usually there were some interesting puppies in
the stable. They found Tom and his dory, and presently they were on
their way. When they reached the hotel Mr. Thornton went to find the
Professor, while the boys started to look for the puppies. But as they
went past the piazza they heard the hotel keeper talking to a group of
ladies.

“No, there is not a mosquito on the Island,” he asserted. “That is one
of the things of which we are most proud. I will give a five-pound box
of the very best candy to any one who will find a mosquito on this
Island.”

The three boys smacked their lips. “Did you hear that? Um! I’d like
that box of candy,” sighed Charlie. “I haven’t had any for weeks.”

“Five pounds of candy all at once!” cried Tom. “I never had so much in
all my life.”

“Oh, I have,” said Kenneth, “at Christmas time. My! Isn’t it good! I
wish I could find that mosquito; but I suppose no one will. There isn’t
one on the Island, is there, Tom? You ought to know.”

“No,” said Tom. “I never saw one here. I am sure there isn’t one”--He
stopped short with a sudden wicked idea. “There might be, though,” he
added under his breath.

“I couldn’t buy five pounds of very best candy with my two dollars,
could I, Charlie?” asked Kenneth.

“No; but Tom could with his five, if he wanted to spend the money so,”
said Charlie.

“I don’t want to spend the money so,” said Tom almost crossly. But how
he did long for that candy! The boys did not understand what made him
act so queer. He paid very little attention to the five lovely puppies
in the stable. Even when Mr. Thornton came with the Professor, who
told them how proud they ought to feel because they had found such an
interesting shell-mound, praising Tom especially, he did not seem to
care. All the way home he spoke scarcely a word. He was thinking of
something very different from what the others were saying.

When they reached the Cove the boys asked Tom to come and play pirate
after dinner. But Tom said:--

“No, I’m going to be busy this afternoon.”

“Are you going to hunt for more treasure?” asked Mr. Thornton,
laughing. Tom looked queer, but shook his head.

“No,” he said. “I’ve--I’ve got an errand to attend to.” And that was
all he had to say.

After dinner Tom rowed away all alone out into the bay, and he was gone
until supper time. When he came back he pulled his boat up on the beach
and fumbled in his pocket. He was looking for something so very small
that at first he thought he had lost it. But no,--there it was, all
right. It was a tiny pill box. Tom took off the cover and looked in,
grinning to himself. He seemed pleased with his day’s work.

At the supper table Tom’s mother suddenly bent forward and looked at
his face sharply. “Why, Tom!” she said. “Where have you been to get all
bitten up so? You are covered with mosquito bites! You never got them
around here. You must have been over to Mouse Island. There are lots
of mosquitoes in the swamp there.”

Tom turned very red. “Yes, I rowed over to Mouse--this morning. There
were two young fish-hawks in the nest on the old pine tree,” he said
briefly.

“Did the other boys go with you?” asked his mother.

“No; I went all alone,” he answered, bending his face low over his
plate. And then the children began to chatter about something else, for
which Tom was glad.

The next morning Tom took his dory and rowed around the Island to the
hotel. When he came up to the piazza he found Mr. Smith, the hotel man,
talking to a group of ladies, just as he had been doing the day before.
Tom took off his cap politely, and said:--

“Good-morning, sir. I’d like to speak with you.”

“Hello!” said Mr. Smith. “You are one of the Island boys, aren’t you?
Well, what do you want with me, my hearty?”

Tom drew something out of his pocket and handed it to Mr. Smith.

“What’s this? A pill box!” said Mr. Smith, greatly puzzled. “I don’t
want any pills!” All the ladies smiled.

“There’s a mosquito inside, sir,” said Tom. “I heard what you said
yesterday: that you’d give a box of candy to any one who would bring
you a mosquito; so I found one for you. He’s dead, sir,” he added
reassuringly, as Mr. Smith hesitated about taking off the cover of the
pill box.

There was a chorus of laughs at the expression on Mr. Smith’s face;
but finally he decided to smile. “Well, I am surprised and shocked,”
he said. “I could have declared solemnly that there was not a wicked
mosquito on this island. But I will wager that this is the only one.”

“Better not make any more rash offers, Mr. Smith,” said one of the
girls. “You may have to pay for more candy than you bargain for. We
will all set out to hunt.”

“No, I don’t repeat my offer,” said Mr. Smith hastily. “But I suppose I
must pay my debt to our friend here. You come around to-morrow morning,
Sonny,” he said to Tom, “and get your candy. I’ll send to the city for
it by Captain Sackett.”

“Smart boy, isn’t he?” said one lady to another, as Tom went away. “He
has such an honest face.”

Tom heard her words, and his ears turned red. But as he rowed home he
thought triumphantly, “How good that candy will be!” and he smacked his
lips.




CHAPTER X

THE OUTLAW


Yes, it was fine candy! Tom thought he had never tasted anything half
so good, as he took the first nibble. For Mr. Smith kept his promise,
and the candy came safely in Captain Sackett’s care. Five pounds in a
beautiful pink box tied with gold string!

Tom was eager to share it with his brothers and sisters and with the
other pirates; for he was a generous boy.

“I’ll give them a surprise!” he said, chuckling to himself as he rowed
home from the hotel. He knew where he should find the band, for Mary
had said that they were all going that morning to play in the pirate
cave. So he did not go straight home, but rowed on around the Point. He
beached his boat before any one heard him, and ran up towards the cave,
giving a loud war-whoop.

“Hello! where is everybody?” he cried.

The pirates came running from every direction. “Here’s Tom!” cried
Mary. “Oh, Tom! Where have you been?”

“Welcome, Slippery Joe,” said the chief. “Have you had an adventure?”

“I have captured some treasure,” said Tom, grinning. “Look here!” and
he held up the box of candy.

“Candy!” A shout of joy arose, and the pirates surrounded him eagerly.

“It’s share alike,” said Tom. “I have eaten only one piece so far.”

“Oh, Tom! how good of you!” cried Rose. “It is real city candy and must
have cost a lot of money. Did you buy it with your five dollars?”

“I know! I know!” shouted Kenneth. “He found the mosquito; didn’t you,
Tom?”

Tom nodded. “Yes, I found him and got the prize.”

“What do you mean about a mosquito?” “Tell us about it!” begged
the pirates. So they all sat down in a circle, each one munching a
delicious bit of candy, while Tom told about Mr. Smith’s offer, which
Charlie and Kenneth knew already.

“I believed that there wasn’t any use in trying,” said Kenneth. “You
thought yourself that there wasn’t a single mosquito on the Island;
didn’t you, Tom?”

“I know I thought so,” began Tom, “but”--He was interrupted by Susan.

“Oh, I know where he found it!” she said. “He went over to Mouse Island
the other day. There are lots of mosquitoes there. He was all covered
with bites when he came back.”

“Oh, but that wasn’t fair!” cried Rose; “that was cheating. Oh, Tom!”
She put back the piece of candy which she had taken as the box was
passed around the circle for the second time.

There was a long silence. Tom turned red and looked sulky. “What’s the
use of being fussy? I’m a pirate, anyway,” he said. “Aren’t we all
pirates?”

Charlie and Kenneth looked at each other, then Charlie spoke like the
chief of the band: “That wasn’t playing, Tom,” he said; “that was a
_real_ lie. We aren’t going to play that way, if I am captain. We
aren’t going to tell any lies. Here! take your old candy. We don’t want
any of it. Put it back!” he commanded the others. And reluctantly they
all did as Rose had done.

“Ho! all right!” said Tom, jumping to his feet angrily. “If you don’t
want any, I guess I can manage to worry it down. But you are awful
sillies. I won’t belong to your old band!” and he flounced out of the
cave with the box of candy under his arm. So Tom became an outlaw.

Tom munched away at his candy all by himself, and tried to pretend
that he enjoyed it very much. But somehow it was not as good as he had
expected. The emptier the box became the less he cared for the candy,
which was a very odd thing. Usually, as every one knows, unless one
gobbles it all at once like a little pig, the candy grows better and
better, until when there are only a few pieces left it is so perfectly
delicious that one cannot bear to think of its disappearing altogether.
Before the box was half finished Tom was heartily tired of it. When
the last piece was gone he took the box out in his dory, threw it
overboard, and smashed it viciously with his oar.

“I don’t want to see any more candy as long as I live!” he said. But
this was a week later.

All this time Tom had been an outlaw. He would not play with the other
children, not even with his brothers and sisters; for he thought that
they were all in league against him. He thought they were all disloyal.
He had meant to be generous, and share his candy with them; but they
had looked at it in a different way. How silly it was to pretend that
he was not playing pirate fairly! Why, pirates did much worse things
than that! He had never thought till now that it was mean to tell a
lie; but when he remembered how shocked Rose had looked, Tom turned
very red. That was hardest of all to bear,--that Rose should think him
mean.

Tom wondered if any one would tell his father and mother. But no
one did. The pirate captain had made his band promise not to be
“telltales.” Tom did not know this, however, and at every meal-time he
eyed his brothers and sisters suspiciously, waiting to see what would
happen.

His mother said sometimes, “How queer you act nowadays, Tom! What is
the matter with you?”

“Nothing,” Tom would answer sulkily; and as soon as he could leave the
table he would go off by himself.

The pirate band was sadly broken. Mary felt so sorry about Tom, who
would not let her talk to him, that she stayed at home and cried a good
deal. Except Sue, the other little Prouts would not go anywhere without
Mary. Sue was the only one who went to Sweetbrier Cottage. But Charlie
and Kenneth said it was no fun playing pirate without more boys. So
they went off by themselves, while Sue and Rose played dolls in Beech
House. Nobody was so happy as before that unlucky mosquito had spoiled
everything.

All this while Tom had plenty of time to think. Somehow things looked
different to him now. Gradually he had been making up his mind.

One day he got into his dory and rowed around the Island to the end
where the hotel stood. As usual there was a crowd upon the piazza, with
Mr. Smith in the midst. Tom thought it was the largest crowd he had
ever seen. He hung back and hesitated at first, but finally he screwed
up his courage. He went straight to the hotel man and stood twirling
his cap uneasily. Then he spoke quickly:--

“I have come to tell you, sir, that I didn’t play fair about that
mosquito. I knew what you said was true, and that there wasn’t one on
the Island; so I went over to Mouse, where there are a plenty, and
I caught one there. It was a lie, and I am sorry. I have just five
dollars,--I guess that will pay for the candy. Here it is, sir.” And
he thrust into the hand of the amazed Mr. Smith the bill which Mr.
Thornton had given him to pay for his share in the pirate treasure.

“Hold on! Stop!” cried Mr. Smith, as Tom darted away. But he soon saw
that it was no use for a little fat man like him to try to catch Tom,
who had the start. So he sat down again, shaking his head.

“I don’t even know his name!” he said, looking helplessly at the
bill in his hand. “But this relieves my mind very much. I am greatly
pleased, ladies, that you have this assurance that our Island is
without mosquitoes.”

“He was a brave boy to confess before us all,” said one of the ladies.
“I like his face. I wish we knew who he is.”

“So do I,” said Mr. Smith. “I must find out.”




CHAPTER XI

GULL ROCK


Susan and Rose were tired of playing dolls in Beech House all by
themselves.

“Let’s not play this any more,” said Rose. “Sue, let us go and look for
that treasure, the _real_ treasure, which the boys could not find.”

“All right,” said Sue. “Let’s!”

They ran along the cliff until they came to the bathing beach, then
they climbed down to the sand.

“I know where I think the treasure is,” said Rose. “I think it is out
there on that great big pile of rock where the gulls are. I have always
wanted to go out on those rocks, but sometimes one can’t go, because
there is water all around them. See, we could go now.”

“Yes,” said Susan. “I never was out there either. Let’s go!”

This stony point, of which Rose spoke, was called Gull Rock. It rose
gray and jagged out of the sea, looking like a castle of stone. It was
a favorite resting-place of the sea-gulls. Great flocks of them wheeled
and screamed around the rocks and settled on them in gray clouds. There
was a narrow pathway of stones which led out to Gull Rock, and on each
side of the path the waves lapped gently. The tide was coming in.

“Let’s take off our shoes and stockings,” said Rose. So they did. “Now,
follow my leader!” Rose cried; and with much squealing and giggling the
little girls began to hop from stone to stone along the narrow path. It
was very exciting! They kept tumbling down, for the rocks were wet and
slippery, and in some places were covered with seaweed, which as every
one knows is the slitheriest kind of thing under foot! Sometimes their
feet went _splash!_ into the pools of water which stood here and there
on the path. But they did not mind that, because their feet were bare.

[Illustration: ROSE AND SUE CROSS UPON THE SLIPPERY STONES]

At last they came to Gull Rock. They climbed up to the top. My! how
surprised the sea-gulls were when the two little heads appeared above
the edge of the rock, and how fast they flapped away, chattering and
screaming hard things about these uninvited guests!

“It was too bad to disturb them,” said Rose, who always meant to be
polite to animals and birds. “But I did so want to see what was on
these rocks. Come, Sue; let us climb down on that other side.”

This was the side farthest away from the bathing beach, looking
straight out to sea. They scrambled down towards the water, and finally
they came to a great hole like a well, that seemed to go down forever.

“Oh, look!” cried Rose. “I do believe there might be a treasure hidden
in the bottom of this hole. Doesn’t it look mysterious, Sue?”

“Oh, yes!” said Sue. She did not know what “mysterious” meant, but she
thought it had something to do with treasures.

“Look, there are cracks in the side, like steps,” said Rose. “Let’s go
down.”

“Oh, do you dare?” cried Sue. “There might be something awful at the
bottom.”

“Pooh!” said Rose. “I am not afraid. I am going down.” And she began to
descend, fitting her bare toes into the cracks of the rocks. Sue was
afraid, but she followed, for she did not dare be left behind.

They went down for what seemed a long way, when suddenly there was a
funny noise below them. “_Chug!_” went something; and it sounded like a
growl. Sue gave a loud scream.

“Oh!” she cried. “There _is_ something down there!” And she began
to scramble up. Now Rose did not mind the “chug” so much as she did
the scream. Rose hated screams. When Sue cried “oh!” so suddenly, it
startled Rose. She jumped; her foot slipped out of its crack, and she
fell.

Down she tumbled, bumping herself on the rocks as she went. She came
flat on the bottom of the hole with her foot doubled under her, and
she gave a cry of pain.

“Oh! what is it?” called Sue, in a shaking voice from above. “Is the
creature eating you up?”

“Oh, no!” moaned Rose. “It is my foot, my foot! It hurts me. I can’t
stand up on it. Oh! oh!” Rose was a brave little girl and she never
cried unless she was badly hurt. But now the pain was terrible.

“Oh, if there isn’t any awful creature there, I will come down and help
you,” said Sue. Presently she, too, came slipping into the bottom of
the hole. But she fell without hurting herself. There was plenty of
room for her beside Rose. She found that they were in a little cave.
But it was not a nice one like the pirate cave. It was damp and wet and
slimy, very cold, with the disagreeable smell of decaying seaweed.

Sue looked around fearfully and shivered. “It is a horrid place,” she
said. “I am afraid to stay here. Let’s go out quickly.”

She helped Rose to her feet; but when she tried to step poor Rose
screamed with pain and fell back in a heap.

“I can’t walk,” she wailed. “My foot is broken, I think. See, it is all
swelled up!”

Sure enough. The poor foot was turning the most dreadful color, a mixed
purple and green, and it was twice as big as it ought to be. Rose had
twisted her ankle badly.

“Oh, what shall we do?” said Sue. “How will you ever get out?”

Just then “chug!” came that same queer sound. This time both Rose and
Sue screamed and looked with wide eyes down into the farther corner of
the cave, which was narrow and dark. They expected to see some creature
come creeping out; but nothing appeared.

“What do you suppose it is?” whispered Sue.

“I don’t know,” said Rose. “But it is dreadful. I want to go home.”

“What shall we do?” wailed Susan, beginning to cry.

“Don’t do that!” said Rose. “It will not do any good, you know. Oh, of
course, you will have to go home and get somebody to come and help me.”
She shuddered to think of being left alone. “Go quickly, Sue. And oh,
do come back as soon as you can!”

“I will,” said Sue; and she began to climb out of the hole. Rose’s
heart sank as she heard the sound of Sue’s feet growing fainter and
fainter, and she almost called her back; but she bit her lips and tried
to be brave. When Sue called down “Good-by!” she felt her heart grow
very cold indeed. It sounded so far away. Every one was so far away,
and she was alone in that dreadful place with no one to help!

Just then _chug!_ came that sound again. What could it be? There surely
was something in the cave beside herself. Rose stared fearfully into
the dark corner, but still she saw nothing. She waited nervously for
the noise to come again. There it was, louder than ever,--_chug!_ And
this time a little splash of water spurted out of the darkness. Was
some animal splashing there?--Why, no! Of course, it was a little
wave coming in from the sea. There must be a crack in the bottom of
the cave. Well, that was not so bad. Rose almost laughed to think how
frightened she had been. But her foot gave a twinge of pain and she
cried “Ow!” instead.

Rose wondered how long she would have to stay there. It would take some
time, she knew, for Susan to run home and bring her father back. But
already it seemed as if she had waited for hours.

_Chug!_ came the noise again, very fiercely. This time a spout of water
spattered across the cave into Rose’s lap. She did not like this, and
painfully drew herself as close as she could against the wall of the
cave, so that the next wave should not reach her. But it did reach her.
In a few minutes there came another _chug!_ very loud indeed, and with
it there was a bang which seemed to shake the rock itself. In a second
a jet of water burst out of the darkness, spattering Rose from head
to foot. She screamed, for now she knew what it meant. The tide was
rising, and the waves were rushing into the crack at the bottom of the
cave. By and by it would be full of water, and then what would become
of her?

There came another _chug!_ and a bang on the wall outside, and she
heard a big wave burst over the rock. A second later the spout of water
leaped at her, bigger than ever, and at the same time a little stream
began to trickle down into the hole from above. The waves were dashing
across Gull Rock, and soon the cave would be flooded!

Poor Rose was now thoroughly frightened. Once more she tried to rise
and pull herself up the well. But it was of no use. She could not stand
on her foot, and she sank back with a moan.

Another wave dashed against the rock, and when it trickled away it left
Rose drenched and gasping for breath. What should she do? She knew that
if something did not happen to help her in a few minutes, she should
be drowned. Oh, why did not Sue hurry? Why did not Papa come?

“Papa! Papa!” she cried. “Oh, help, help!--I must scream as loud as I
can,” she thought. “Sue does not know. She will not think there is any
danger yet. Perhaps if they hear me they will hurry.--Oh, help! help!”
she cried, at the top of her lungs.

And then something happened!




CHAPTER XII

THE RESCUE


That same morning Mr. Smith, the hotel man, drove up to Sweetbrier
Cottage. He found Mr. Thornton sitting on the front steps sharpening
his knife.

“Good-morning, Sir,” said Mr. Smith. “Do you happen to know a boy named
Tom?”

“Tom Prout? Yes, I do,” said Mr. Thornton.

“Well, I want to see him,” said Mr. Smith. “I have a five-dollar bill
that belongs to him.”

“A five-dollar bill!” exclaimed Mr. Thornton in surprise. “What do you
mean?” Then Mr. Smith told him the story of the mosquito and the box of
candy.

“What do you think of that?” said Mr. Smith, when he had finished.

“I think that Tom was a brave boy to confess before all those people,”
answered Mr. Thornton. “He did wrong, of course, but he made up for it
as well as he could. Tom means to be a good boy, Mr. Smith.”

“I am sure of it,” agreed Mr. Smith warmly, “and I want to give him a
chance to make up for that candy without paying me a cent. I guess he
will want all his money by and by for school or for something else. I
should be glad to help him earn something at the hotel.”

“Tom would like that, I know,” said Mr. Thornton, much pleased. “He is
very handy with boats. I trust my children out with him every day.”

“Is that so?” cried Mr. Smith. “The very thing! I’ll get him to row the
ladies back and forth from the yacht. I’d like to see Tom.”

“I think we shall find him playing with the other children,” said Mr.
Thornton. “Will you come with me?” (You see, Mr. Thornton did not know
that Tom was an outlaw.)

The two men went along the cliff to Beech House. It was empty except
for the dolls and the Teddy Bear which Rose and Susan had left there
when they went to look for the treasure. Then they went on until they
came to the pirate cave. But Kenneth and Charlie were playing there
alone.

“Where is Tom?” asked Mr. Thornton. “This gentleman wants to see him.”

“I don’t know,” said Kenneth.

“He doesn’t play with us any more,” added Charlie.

“Why not?” asked Mr. Thornton. But the boys looked at each other and
were silent. They were not going to tell tales.

“We know all about the unlucky mosquito,” said Mr. Thornton. “Tom was
sorry, and told Mr. Smith the whole story himself. He gave his five
dollars to pay for the candy.”

“Did he do that?” said Charlie, his face brightening.

“Hurrah for Tom!” cried Kenneth. “I knew he was all right.--Hello!
there he goes now in his dory. Tom! oh, Tom!”

Kenneth waved his hat and shouted, but Tom did not seem to hear. He was
at some distance out in the bay, rowing towards the bathing beach. They
all shouted and waved, and finally Tom seemed to hear, for he looked
around; but he did not show any intention of rowing towards the cave.
Perhaps he still felt like an outlaw.

“He rows well,” said Mr. Smith, as Tom disappeared around the Point.

“He knows more about boats than a good many men ever learn,” said Mr.
Thornton. “I wonder where he is going.”

“We don’t seem likely to catch him this morning,” said Mr. Smith; “but
if you see him, I wish you would ask him to come over and talk with me
to-morrow. Hello! what’s this?”

Down the cliff scrambled Susan, panting and disheveled. As she ran she
shouted something which they could not understand. But when she came
nearer they made out the word “Rose! Rose!”

In an instant Mr. Thornton jumped to his feet and ran to meet her.
“What is the matter?” he cried, turning pale. “What has happened to
Rose?”

Presently Sue recovered enough breath to speak brokenly. “She--she
fell!” gasped Sue. “She broke her foot, I guess. She--can’t walk.
We--were looking--for the treasure--in the cave--out on the
rocks--beyond the bathing beach.”

“My poor little Rose!” gasped Mr. Thornton; and he started on the
run, followed by the others. They all ran as fast as they could, but
it was a long way. Poor Sue had found it so when she stumbled along
going in the other direction. Now she toiled back again far behind
the others,--behind even Mr. Smith, who was short and fat and grew
very red as he ran. He had to stop often and mop his forehead with his
handkerchief; but Mr. Thornton never stopped until he came to the
bathing beach. Kenneth and Charlie were close behind him. They heard
him give a loud cry when he looked across the beach to Gull Rock, where
Sue had said Rose was. In a minute they saw the reason.

Gull Rock was now an island!

A wide bay of water stretched between the rock and the shore, with only
a few stones poking up here and there on what had been the pathway
by which Rose and Sue had crossed. It was nearly high tide. As they
looked, a great wave rolled in and covered Gull Rock with spray.

“Look at that!” cried Mr. Thornton. “My little Rose is out there! Oh, I
must go to her!” And he dashed into the water and began to wade along
the rocks of the hidden pathway. But the stones were slippery and he
kept stumbling.

“You can’t do it!” yelled Mr. Smith. “We must get a boat.”

“There is no boat within half a mile,” cried Mr. Thornton, in despair.
“I must try to reach her in this way.” Just then another great wave
came rolling in. It broke against Mr. Thornton’s knees. He lost his
footing and tottered. The pool into which he fell was over his head,
and he would have drowned if he had not known how to swim. The water
was growing deeper all the time. “I must swim over,” thought Mr.
Thornton. “But even if I get there safely I don’t see how I can climb
up onto those steep rocks. However, I must try.”

Just as he was about to strike out into deep water, there came a shout
from Mr. Smith and the boys on the shore. “Tom! Tom!” they cried.
“Hurrah for Tom!”

“Papa! Papa! come ashore!” cried Kenneth. “Tom has Rose in his boat!”

Sure enough! Tom’s dory was just rounding Gull Rock, coming fast
towards shore, and in the stern sat Rose, very pale but safe.

You see, Tom was just passing Gull Rock in his dory when Rose gave that
last cry for help. He had heard it, but at first he thought her little
shrill voice was only a sea-gull screaming on the rock. But when he
heard it a second time cry,--“Help! oh, help!” he pricked up his ears.
No sea-gull ever spoke words so plainly as that. Tom shouted, “Hullo
there!” in answer, and in a moment he heard a voice cry, “Tom! Tom!
come quickly!”

“That is Rose’s voice!” thought Tom, surprised almost out of his wits.
He rowed as close to the rock as he dared, on account of the surf. “Is
that you, Rose?” he shouted. “Where are you?”

“I’m down in a dreadful cave, Tom,” said Rose very faintly. “My foot is
broken, and the water is coming in. Oh, come quickly, Tom, or I shall
be drowned!”

“I guess that’s so,” thought Tom, with a sudden idea, as a great wave
broke over Gull Rock. “She is down in the Punch Bowl! It’s almost high
tide. Oh, I must be quick or we’ll both be drowned.”

Tom had no thought of being afraid. Rose must be saved if he could do
it. Now he had a chance to prove what a good boatman he was. He rowed
as fast as possible around Gull Rock to a place where he thought he
could land. It was on the sheltered side of the rock, where the waves
did not break quite so heavily; but it was difficult enough. He drew up
his boat and fastened it securely. Then he hurried to the Punch Bowl,
which was the fisherman’s name for that dangerous cave.

Tom knew it well. When he came to the hole he shouted down anxiously.
Rose answered, so he knew that she was still safe. Down he climbed,
nimbly as a monkey. At the bottom he found the poor little girl in a
pool of water.

“Oh, Tom!” she cried. “I am so glad! Do you think you can get me out?”

“’Course I’ll get you out!” said Tom, feeling very big. Just then a
great wave came sweeping in and nearly drowned them both. “We must
hurry,” sputtered Tom; “there’s no time to spare. Come, Rose, you must
try as hard as you can.” Rose tried as hard as she could. Tom lifted
and pulled and pushed, and somehow or other he managed to help her out
of that dreadful hole. Then he half carried, half dragged her over the
rocks to his dory. Just as they were about to push off there came the
biggest wave of all. It broke completely over the rock, filled the boat
half full of water, and knocked both the children off their feet. But
they clung together and were not swept into the sea.

“If we had been in the cave when that wave broke,” said Tom solemnly,
“we should both have been drowned. Let’s get away before another of
those big fellows comes.”

He emptied the water out of the boat, lifted Rose in, and pushed off
with all his might. The next big wave leaped after them, burying Gull
Rock under a heap of foam. But the children had escaped. The boat was
moving through quieter waters towards the bathing beach.

They heard a shout from the shore, and looking up saw the crowd of
anxious watchers. There were Kenneth and Charlie dancing up and down
and shouting, “Hurrah!” There was Mr. Smith, first fluttering his
handkerchief, then using it to wipe his eyes. There was Mr. Thornton up
to his waist in the water, waving his arms and calling,--

“Rose! Rose! Are you safe?”

“Yes, I’m safe, Papa!” cried Rose. “Tom has saved me.”

In a few minutes Rose was in her father’s arms, and he was hugging
and kissing her, calling her by all her pet baby names. Mr. Smith was
shaking hands with Tom, who looked dazed.

“I’m proud to know you, Tom,” he said. “You are a regular sea-dog,
my boy. We must have you over to the hotel to help us with the boats
there.”

“Tom, my lad,” said Mr. Thornton, as he started to carry Rose up to
the cottage, where her sprained ankle could be cared for, “I’ll never
forget this. Boys,” he added, turning to Charlie and Kenneth, who
stood eagerly looking on, “if you want to see what a real hero looks
like, there he is. You had better write it down in your pirate log-book
that one of your band saved a little girl’s life. That is something for
you to boast of, indeed.”

“I must go home and get dry,” muttered Tom, turning away much
embarrassed. After all, he was an outlaw, and he knew that Mr. Smith
understood why, though Mr. Thornton might not. Tom did not belong to
the pirate band any more. But when he turned shamefacedly away, Kenneth
and Charlie came running up, and each seized him by the hand.

“Tom, old fellow, we are proud of you!” said Kenneth heartily.

“Tom,” said Charlie, taking something out of his pocket, “here is my
pirate knife. You have got to be captain now. You are the best of us
all, as Uncle Jack says.”

“Hurrah!” shouted Kenneth, dancing up and down. “We have a real live
hero for our captain, and we will do great things!”

“Oh, pshaw!” said Tom, turning red but looking pleased. He saw that
they no longer thought him an outlaw. “I don’t want to be captain,” he
protested.

“You must, you must!” cried Charlie and Kenneth. “Mustn’t he, Mr.
Smith?”

“Sure,” said Mr. Smith, “I think he will make a fine captain. But I
say, Captain, I hope you will find time to do a little un-piratical
work for me, as a plain sailor. I want you to help with the boats
at the hotel. Perhaps it isn’t as exciting as pirating or catching
mosquitoes,” he added, with a twinkle, “but I think you will find that
it pays better.”

“Oh, I want to earn some money,” said Tom. “Some day I want to go to
school in the city.”

“But if you go to Mr. Smith’s you won’t have time to play with us,”
said Charlie; and Kenneth added, “Then you won’t be our pirate captain,
Tom?”

“Oh, yes he will,” said Mr. Smith. “I’ll only keep him a few hours
every day, when the ladies want to go sailing. Tom, will you be my
sailor man?”

“Thank you, everybody,” said Tom, grinning. “I will be both, if you
want me to. I’ll be a pirate captain and an honest sailor.”

“Here’s a little advance wages to begin with,” said Mr. Smith, handing
Tom the famous five-dollar bill. Tom flushed.

“Thank you, sir,” he said. “But would you mind waiting until I have
earned it? I want to start square this time.”

“Good for you, Tom!” said Mr. Smith approvingly. “I see that we shall
be great friends.”

And Mr. Smith proved to be a true prophet.




  The Riverside Press
  CAMBRIDGE · MASSACHUSETTS
  U · S · A




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FRIENDS AND COUSINS ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of The wooing of Leola, by Mrs. Alex.
McVeigh Miller

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The wooing of Leola

Author: Mrs. Alex. McVeigh Miller

Release Date: December 18, 2022 [eBook #69569]

Language: English

Produced by: Demian Katz and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
             https://www.pgdp.net (Images courtesy of the Digital
             Library@Villanova University.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WOOING OF LEOLA ***





  Price,          THE LEISURE HOUR LIBRARY.           No. 67
Five Cents.

F. M. LUPTON, Publisher, 23-37 City Hall Place, New York.

Copyright, 1905 and 1906, by F. M. Lupton.

THE WOOING OF LEOLA.

BY MRS. ALEX. M’VEIGH MILLER.

[Illustration: “ALL THE WHILE HE WAS UNCONSCIOUS OF LEOLA, LYING THERE
LIKE A DEAD GIRL ON THE GROUND.”]




THE WOOING OF LEOLA.

BY MRS. ALEX. M’VEIGH MILLER.




TABLE OF CONTENTS


CHAPTER I. SOME PRETTY PICTURES.
CHAPTER II. ALL FOR LOVE.
CHAPTER III. ARE YOU AN ANGEL?
CHAPTER IV. BEWARE OF JEALOUSY.
CHAPTER V. A HONEY BEE AND A HONEY FLOWER.
CHAPTER VI. LOVE’S ENTANGLEMENTS.
CHAPTER VII. BOAST NOT THYSELF OF TO-MORROW.
CHAPTER VIII. WINDING A WEB.
CHAPTER IX. WHAT THE ROBINS HEARD.
CHAPTER X. CHESTER OLYPHANT’S CURSE.
CHAPTER XI. A TERRIBLE DEED.
CHAPTER XII. A WAYSIDE FLOWER.
CHAPTER XIII. IN THE SPIDER’S WEB.
CHAPTER XIV. A LITTLE CONSPIRACY.
CHAPTER XV. SURPRISES ALL AROUND.
CHAPTER XVI. WIDOW GRAY AND THE YOUNG CAVE-HUNTERS.
CHAPTER XVII. “TIME DOES NOT STOP FOR TEARS.”
CHAPTER XVIII. “IF HATE COULD KILL.”
CHAPTER XIX. LIKE A STAR IN THE NIGHT OF HER DESPAIR.
CHAPTER XX. “ALL THE WORLD AND WE TWO, AND HEAVEN BE OUR STAY.”




CHAPTER I.

SOME PRETTY PICTURES.


“Oh, mamma, I have had a lovely time at Mrs. Van Bibber’s! I would not
have missed her reception for the world!”

The blonde beauty threw herself, with a silken frou-frou of rich
attire, back into a luxurious chair, clasped her white, jeweled hands,
and rolled her large, bluebell eyes heavenward, practising the seraphic
expression she found so effective with the men.

She repeated, rapturously:

“I would not have missed it for the world! Everything was on the
grandest scale, and went off beautifully. I felt that it was worth
all our scheming and planning for my lovely gown;” and she smiled,
complacently, at her rich blue silk robe loaded with fine lace
trimmings that set off so well her blue eyes and fluffy flaxen hair.

“But, mamma,” she continued, “how sober you look. Is your rheumatism
worse, poor dear?”

The faded, elderly woman, with the careworn face and fretful mouth,
clasped her thin, white hands nervously over her knee and answered,
wearily:

“My rheumatism is bad enough, but what worries me most is that I made
such a mistake--pawning my diamonds for that splendid gown when you
might have done better remaining at home without it!”

“Mamma, what can you mean?” and Jessie Stirling frowned, impatiently,
tearing a white rose to pieces with excited fingers.

“I mean that, after all my sacrifices to get you ready for Mrs. Van
Bibber’s reception, hoping you might meet Chester Olyphant there and
make up your quarrel, he came here to call on you in your absence.”

“And I missed him like that! Oh, what a shame! But who could have
dreamed he would miss the reception? Still, mamma, you should have kept
him till I returned. Oh, why did you let him get away?” queried the
girl, angrily.

“How could I help it, my dear? You know very well I would have been
willing to chain him to his chair to keep him here till you came! I
did my best--made talk, and tried to hold him, but after an hour he
pleaded an engagement and hurried away.”

“But he will come again. Surely he will! Of course you asked--made him
promise?” cried Jessie, wildly.

“Yes, oh yes, but he did not say he would. He only came, he said, to
return some negatives you loaned him to make pictures from--the ones
you took with your own camera in the mountains last summer.”

“Oh, yes, I remember--Uncle Hermann’s picturesque old stone mansion,
and some mountains and river views taken from the bridge at Alderson.”

“Yes, and some pictures, too, of that hoidenish girl, Leola. I wish you
had left those out, Jessie.”

“Why, really, mamma, I forgot they were in the negative book, for I
didn’t mean to show them to Chester. Not that I could be jealous of a
wild thing like Leola Mead, but because I promised her no one should
see them. There was that one of her wading in the creek, you know, and
another in bloomers sitting astride her white pony Rex, and another in
hunting costume, rifle on her shoulder. Really, she wasn’t pretty in
any of the negatives, except her white evening gown with the lilies on
her shoulder.”

“Yes, he said that was lovely, and the others, too, and he asked no end
of questions about her, and where she lived. He pretended to be anxious
to see the scenery, but I guess it was Leola more than anything else.
Men are so sly!”

“And you, mamma, what did you tell him?” Jessie asked, anxiously.

“Oh, I told him we should be glad to have him visit Wheatlands some
time when we were there with my half brother, but I made up my mind he
should never go there till you were safely his wife.”

“Good, mamma, though, really, I cannot look upon Leola Mead seriously
as a rival. Why, she is only a simple country girl, with no style or
good clothes at all.”

“But dangerously pretty, Jessie, don’t forget that!--and as for style,
well, she is graceful and dashing as any girl I ever saw, and there’s
no telling what might happen if they met. Anyhow, he just plied me
with eager questions about the girl, and I could see he was almost
fascinated by her pictures. Of course I did not encourage him any. I
said she was my half brother’s ward, and presumably of low origin, as
he was reticent about her birth, and said she had not a friend in the
world but himself. I enlarged on her rude manners and hoidenish ways,
and said she was not nearly as pretty as the pictures.”

“When in reality she is ten times prettier,” laughed Jessie. “So
you are right. He must never see Leola Mead until I am his wife. I
shall write him a sweet little note pretending he has lost one of the
negatives, and ask him to call again.”

“I do not believe he will, for he evaded the question when I urged him
to do so. Indeed, I even hinted how sorry you were over the quarrel,
and he said, quite amiably, that it was all past now and he hoped you
and he might be good friends again.”

“Friends, bah, he shall be my husband yet! I will win him back again;
his millions shall not slip through my fingers this time, I promise
you, mamma, and woe to any girl that dares try to rival me! But,
really, I am not jealous of anybody, for I think I see his little game.
He wants to make up, or he would not have come. It was easy enough
to return the pictures by mail, now, wasn’t it? But he probably came
because he wanted to see me, and that chat about Leola was only to make
me uneasy and jealous, don’t you see?”

“I hope so, dear, but really I was quite frightened the way he talked
of the lovely pictures he had made from the negatives.”

“Lovely nonsense!” Jessie cried, sharply, with an angry gleam of her
blue eyes, and a vicious snap of her white teeth as she added: “I
believe I would try to murder Leola if she came between us, for I
cannot believe his love for me is dead so soon. If it is, I’ll soon
warm over the old coals again. I’ll write him a note right away, saying
how sorry I am that I was out this afternoon, and asking him to come
this evening or to-morrow.”

“Pray do so,” cried the scheming mother, whose small means were
dwindling away so fast in the effort to keep afloat in fashionable
society till her daughter’s beauty won a rich husband.

Jessie wrote and dispatched her pleading note before she removed the
dainty hat from her fluffy blonde hair, and when evening came she
was waiting for him, gowned in dainty white, befitting the warm June
weather.

To her amazement and anger there was no reply, and the next morning
she read, in the society columns of her favorite daily, that Chester
Olyphant had left New York the previous evening on a yachting trip with
several other young men, and would be absent two weeks.

“Well, thank Heaven, there are only men in the party, so he will not
be exposed to any other girl’s fascinations on the trip, and I’ll be
waiting for him when he comes back,” cried Jessie, swallowing her
chagrin the best she could.




CHAPTER II.

ALL FOR LOVE.


Leola Mead sprang to the back of her mettlesome pony and almost flew
down the mountain road, her great, dark eyes flashing with anger, her
cheeks glowing crimson, her wealth of golden locks streaming like a
ruddy banner on the breeze. Against the tight bodice of her riding
habit her young bosom heaved tumultuously with the angry throbs of
her heart, for Leola had just had a bitter quarrel with her guardian,
and now gave vent to her excitement by giving free rein to Rex in a
breakneck ride.

It was a lovely June morning in the mountains of West Virginia, all
Nature at her sweetest and fairest, and Leola had been planning such a
happy, happy day; but when she came out from breakfast ready for her
morning canter, there stood her saturnine old guardian asking her to
step into the library for a moment before she rode away.

Leola obeyed him, pouting, for she hated to lose time indoors this
gladsome, golden day.

There was no love lost between her and her grim guardian, anyway, for
he was a stern old man, reticent and mysterious, spending most of his
time in a horrid laboratory up in the tower chamber of the rough old
stone house, where the country folk said he was working either to wrest
from Nature the secret of making gold, or the still greater mystery
of distilling a magic elixir of life. About the neighborhood he got
the sobriquet Wizard Hermann, and looked the character with his lean,
stooping form, long black hair floating over his coat collar, strongly
marked features and cunning mouth, while his keen, gray eyes, under
bushy brows, seemed to pierce one through with their questioning gaze.

His ancestors had been pioneer Indian fighters, and the large house
built of rough stone, just as taken from the quarry, dated back to the
time when the red man roamed the almost unbroken forest.

In all the years while Leola had lived here with her governess in the
lonely old house, she could not remember a caress from the mysterious,
self-absorbed old man, who seemed to have no human interests or
passions, and to care for no one but the dwarfish servitor who helped
him in his laboratory, the only person he ever admitted within its
precincts.

It was no wonder, then, that Leola followed Wizard Hermann unwillingly
into the musty-smelling library, with its high walnut wainscot,
dingy, green-stenciled walls, and side shelves lined with old leather
volumes, while the bare oaken floor on which she trod was worn with the
footsteps of successive generations who had passed from earth in the
fullness of time and been gathered to their fathers.

In the somber room with its closed shutters Leola stood facing her grim
guardian with the impatient air of some beautiful young princess giving
audience to a vassal.

As he stood hesitating where to begin, with an unwonted diffidence, she
said, coldly:

“Speak; tell me your wish at once, sir, for I must hurry. I have an
engagement in town with my dressmaker.”

At those words Wizard Hermann’s gloomy brow cleared as if by magic,
and quickly striking his lean, scarred hands together, he retorted,
maliciously:

“An engagement with your dressmaker, eh, my proud lady? Very well,
while you are there you may give the woman an order for your wedding
gown.”

“Sir,” she uttered, in amazement, her cheeks reddening.

Wizard Hermann retorted, with a hoarse, sardonic laugh:

“I said give the woman an order for your wedding gown, Leola Mead, for
you are to be married soon.”

Leola stared, speechlessly, a moment, wondering if the old man was
losing his mind, and, taking advantage of her silence, he continued,
with forced bravado:

“You look surprised, my haughty young lady, so I will explain. I have
accepted a desirable proposal for your hand, and as you are plenty old
enough to marry--nineteen your last birthday--I have named the wedding
for a month from to-day.”

Leola, recovering her speech, cried, indignantly:

“Quite a cool proceeding on your part, sir, I must say, but I wish you
to understand that I am not ready to marry yet.”

“That makes no difference to me, for you will have to obey me, Leola
Mead, understand that,” he replied, with rising anger. “You are my
ward, and in pursuance of my duty to you, I have accepted a man for
your husband who worships the ground you walk upon and will spend money
on you like water.”

Leola’s dark eyes blazed with indignation.

“You must surely be mad,” she cried, passionately. “The man I would
choose for my husband must ask me for my hand, not you, sir. This
is free America, you must remember, not France, where marriages are
arranged by old people who have forgotten love and youth. I refuse the
suitor you have chosen for me without even hearing his name!”

The old man muttered, sullenly.

“Marriage is the destiny of all young girls. You would not wish to grow
into a sour old maid?”

“No, I do not intend to be an old maid, sir, but,” with a proud toss of
her lovely head, “when I marry I shall choose the man myself, and it
shall be for love, not money!”

“Money is the only thing worth having--money and long life,” he
muttered, but Leola, with a contemptuous laugh, turned to go.

He sprang between her and the door, putting his back against it.

“I have not done telling you all about this matter yet,” he exclaimed,
but Leola stamped her little foot in a fury, replying:

“I will not hear another word, I tell you, and you may as well let me
go, and give up your foolish plans!”

“By Heaven, miss, you shall marry the man of my choice--I swear it!”
cried the wizard, violently, but she answered, coldly:

“Pray let me hear no more such nonsense, Uncle Hermann. Granted you
are my guardian, the law does not give you the power of marrying me to
anyone against my will. No, not another word, or I shall think you are
going insane, if not so already. Get away from that door, and let me
out, or I shall scream for assistance or jump out of the window!”

“You would not dare do either!” he said.

Leola ran like a flash to the window, pushing back the creaking
shutters, letting in a flood of June sunshine. The next moment she
sprang to the high sill, crying, defiantly:

“Now, get away from that door or I will jump out!”

The old man muttered, incredulously: “You would break your neck!”

Leola answered, recklessly:

“I shall risk that unless you let me out of the door. Come, now, I
will count ten. If you do not move before then I am gone,” and drawing
her dainty little feet up into the window, and dangling them on the
outside, she began counting in a clear, high voice:

“One--two--three--four--five--six--seven--eight--nine--ten!”

Wizard Hermann remained standing with his back toward the door,
regarding her with an incredulous leer, never dreaming she would make
the foolhardy leap, for from the window sill it was twenty feet to the
ground.

But Leola was as good as her word.

While she counted she kept her flashing dark eyes full upon his
stubborn face, and seeing that he did not move as the last word left
her lips, she deliberately turned and sprang out upon the ground.

A cry of alarm shrilled over the old man’s lips, and he stood like one
rooted to the spot, listening for the cry of pain that must announce
the dread result of the perilous leap. Visions of Leola crippled or
dead floated before his mind’s eye, and he muttered, savagely:

“Little vixen, if you have broken your neck it is your own fault! But
if you live you shall marry the man of my choice one month from to-day,
I swear it!”

The sound of her voice floated to him indistinctly--was it a laugh or a
groan?

He hurried to the window, shaking with excitement.

There was Leola standing upright on the greensward, brushing her blue
skirt, and humming a little song to herself.

“Are you hurt?” he quavered, anxiously, and she looked up, laughing
maliciously:

“Hurt? Oh, no, not a bit!” she called back, gayly. “I just let myself
go limply, and I came down like a cat on all fours in the grass and
clover. I have fallen higher than that from trees many a time without
hurting myself. It’s easy enough when you learn to go limp and not
stiffen yourself; ha, ha!”

As he glared in amazement she waved her hand, audaciously, adding:

“You ought to try it yourself some time, Uncle Hermann! Well, good-bye,
sir, and mind you don’t let me hear any more of this match-making
business, unless you go and get married yourself!” and with that
parting shot, the merry girl ran across the grass, a vision of youth
and health and beauty, to where her pony was waiting, ready saddled,
beneath a tree. Vaulting lightly to his back, without even waiting to
fasten the loosened tresses of her ruddy hair, the wild young thing
was off and away down the mountain road, her young bosom throbbing
tumultuously, half with anger, half with mirth, at the rencontre with
her guardian.

“The old silly, to think of marrying me off, without so much as by your
leave! The idea!” she exclaimed aloud, adding, more soberly, “Not that
I’d mind having a rich husband if he was handsome and winning, too, but
how often I have heard it said that good looks and riches seldom go
together, so if that’s the case I’d marry for love and let money go!”

Her fit of anger dissolving in the sunshine of sweet good nature, she
hummed, as she galloped on, a fragment of a tender little love-song,
sweet as it was sad:

    “Honey flowers for the honey-comb,
     And the honey-bees from home.

    “A honey-comb and a honey-flower
     And the bee shall have his hour.

    “A honeyed heart for the honey-comb.
     And the humming bee flies home.

    “A heavy heart in the honey-flower.
     And the bee has had his hour.”

Suddenly the low song died on her lips, changing to a cry of alarm.

At a curve in the road she came suddenly upon a startling sight.

Rex just swerved aside from a runaway horse that was dragging behind
it a shattered little runabout, in which stood upright a white-faced
man, straining desperately upon the reins, trying to stop the maddened
animal’s wild career.

Even in that terrible moment, with the black horse plunging madly
forward to the imminent peril of the driver’s life, Leola saw, as by a
flash, that the man was young and very, very handsome, and her heart
throbbed with wild pain at his danger, for on one side the road sloped,
precipitously, downward to a dangerous stream of water, and a plunge
over that steep incline meant death in horrible form.

But what could avert the catastrophe, for it seemed as if nothing could
restrain the plunging brute or turn aside his maddened course toward
the crumbling edge of the yawning precipice that would instantly engulf
both in ruin and death!

A cry of agony, “Oh, God, save him!” shrilled over her rosy lips.

Surely the listening angels heard the prayer, for suddenly she saw
that there was one chance in a thousand to avert the threatening
disaster--one chance, though with deadly peril to herself.

With a high heart of hope, and a courage that defied all the deadly
risk, she dared the consequences, spurring Rex forward in front of the
black horse with a clarion call on her lips that wrought what seemed
like a miracle.

For at her voice, conjoined with a startled whinny from Rex, the
terrified animal, plunging and rearing but an instant before, with
upraised hoofs nearing the verge of the dangerous precipice, now
stopped as if shot, trembling all over, while Leola, throwing out her
arms, caught his neck and clung, clung, clung, with the energy of
despair.




CHAPTER III.

ARE YOU AN ANGEL?


What subtle influence wrought the miracle, for it could not have been
the strength of Leola’s slender hands?

But there stood the satanic black animal, its fury abated, its flight
arrested, its huge form trembling, shuddering, while the foamy sweat
dropped in streams to the ground. As for the driver, he had been hurled
violently backward into the road by the impetus of the sudden stop, and
now lay there without sound or motion, like a dead man.

Leola, waiting only a moment to pat the black horse gently on his
heaving neck, slipped from her saddle and ran to the young man,
leaving, oh, wonder of wonders! the excited creature standing stock
still, and rubbing noses with Rex quite as if they had been old friends.

“Oh, heaven, he is dead!” the girl moaned in anguish.

Her heart sank like lead to see him lying there so still, with a little
stream of blood trickling from his temple, where it had struck against
a jagged rock.

“Oh, if I only had some water,” she sighed, and just then the trickle
of a little spring by the side of the road caught her ears. She ran and
filled her riding cap with the clear fluid, and dashed it in his face.

Oh, joy! he gasped once or twice, and opened on her anxious face a pair
of the bonniest dark blue eyes she had ever met--eyes that seemed to go
exactly with the glossy curls of thick brown hair.

When his gaze met hers he smiled, faintly, and sighed:

“I--I--where am I? Oh, I remember now. I was in an accident; my horse
ran away, and I was thrown out of the runabout. Was I killed? Is this
heaven, and are you an angel?”

Leola laughed a happy, rippling laugh, sweet as music to his ears.

“An angel? No, indeed,” she cried; “and this is not heaven, either,
only a rough, rocky road, where you fell when you pitched out of your
trap. Oh! are you hurt very bad? Does your poor head pain you very
much?”

Their faces were very close together, for she had pillowed his head on
her tender arm, and he could feel the quick throbs of her excited heart
as she waited for his answer.

“I--I--do not feel very bad,” he began, then suddenly lapsed into
unconsciousness again, and this time it seemed to her that he was
surely gone forever.

Tears started in her eyes and fell in a burning shower upon his pallid,
handsome face, mingling with the crimson rain that ran down his cheek.

Again he revived, and, looking up, met that tender, tearful glance of
Leola’s lovely eyes, that made the blood leap through his veins with
rapture.

He said faintly:

“Do not say you are not an angel, for I shall always think of you as
one, sweet girl! Ah, I remember all, now! My runaway horse was going
straight over the declivity when you spurred yours between and caught
his neck in your arms. It was a magnificent thing to do, but a perilous
one, too, to risk your life for an utter stranger!”

Leola smiled brightly, and answered:

“It certainly looked like taking a terrible risk, and would scarcely
have succeeded so well but for one fact quite unknown to you.”

“And that?” he queried, eagerly; and she replied:

“You see, I recognized in your satanic steed a favorite of mine--a
spirited creature that I loved dearly when it belonged to my guardian,
who sold it to the livery stable in town only a week ago. Black Hawk,
as we called him, was an elder brother to my pony Rex, and they were
fond of each other; so, you see, it was really our acquaintance with
Black Hawk that made him so easy to subdue. Just turn your head now,
sir, and you will see the pair biting at each other in the most
affectionate manner.”

“It is wonderful,” he murmured; “but, all the same, I owe you my life,
for you ran a terrible risk trusting to Black Hawk’s possible obedience
to you. What if, in his fury of fear and rage--for he had taken
desperate fright at a well-digging machine in a field--he had proved
unmanageable? You and I must have gone down to death together, all in
one tragic moment.”

“It is true, but let us not think of it, since the danger is past,”
said Leola, making light of it, and adding:

“What troubles me now is how to get assistance for you. I don’t like to
leave you alone, but--Ah! I hear wheels. Some one is coming!”

Sure enough, an old top buggy, drawn by an old gray mare, came
clattering around the curve of the road, and in it sat the one person
most welcome of any one in the world just now--the village doctor.

“Oh, Doctor Barnes, how glad I am to see you! You see, there’s been
an accident,” Leola cried, eagerly, as he drew rein and began to jump
nimbly out.

“Yes, my dear girl; I saw the accident from up on the hill, just as I
was coming out from a patient’s house, and I got to you as fast as old
Dolly would travel. Really, it was a splendid deed of daring!” cried
the middle-aged doctor, patting her bright head in a fatherly way as he
stooped over the young man.

“Ah, a stranger!” he continued. “Well, how much is he hurt? Cut on the
temple, eh? Needs some stitches. Any bones broken, do you think? Wait
till I stanch and bind the wound, and then we will see.”

This accomplished, he tendered the use of his arm, and the young
fellow got upon his feet without much difficulty.

“Ah, you’re all right--unless there’s some internal hurt. Come, I will
put you into my buggy. Your arm on the other side. Leola and I must
take you to the nearest house, which happens to be the Widow Gray’s
cottage, below here. There I can sew up your wound and leave you in
safe hands till we can find out if there’s any internal injuries. All
right. Put your head back against the lap-robe. You will come with us,
Leola; I may need your help.”

Stranger as the young man was, they could not have taken him to
a better place, for Widow Gray was the dearest old woman in the
neighborhood. She lived quite alone in a tidy cottage back among a
grove of maples, or a “sugar camp,” as the country people called it;
for here in the early spring was always produced that toothsome dainty,
maple sugar, so dear to the hearts of school children. The widow had
a neat spare room that she often let to a summer boarder, and to this
white-hung chamber she quickly led Doctor Barnes with his patient, her
round face beaming with good-nature as she promised to do all she could
for the unfortunate young stranger.

“He will need your best nursing, I fear,” exclaimed Doctor Barnes; for,
on getting his patient down upon the bed, he immediately fainted again,
and the swoon was so deep that it was difficult to revive him.

“Oh, he is dead!” sobbed Leola; and the thought carried with it such
agony that it changed and darkened the whole world to her young heart,
so dear had the handsome stranger grown already.




CHAPTER IV.

BEWARE OF JEALOUSY.


How glad she was when he opened his eyes again, and faltered:

“I am quite ashamed of myself, fainting away like a weak woman. I will
promise not to do so again, doctor.”

Doctor Barnes quickly made him as easy as possible, and left him to the
widow’s care, promising to call again that evening to see how he fared,
and also to send word to the livery stable about the horse and trap.

Leola felt she had no further excuse for staying, although, somehow,
she could not bear to go.

She went into the room to say farewell, and he entreated her to stay,
in a weak voice, reinforced by pleading eyes.

She smiled, and shook her head.

“It is better I should go now, for the doctor says you must have
absolute rest and quiet to-day, and I am a sad chatterbox, but I will
come to-morrow and bring you some flowers,” she promised.

She pressed his hand in mute farewell, and the contact thrilled her
with rapturous emotion, for even with his pallor and his bandaged head
he appeared to her a king among men--a veritable Prince Charming.

A great change had come to her heart since she rode out so blithely
that morning, and the words of her simple song were coming true:

    “A honey-comb and a honey-flower.
     And the bee shall have his hour.”

She forgot all about her errand to town, and, remounting Rex, went for
a long ride, miles away, to a beautiful Blue Sulphur Spring, where she
lingered for hours upon the green lawn, dreaming over and over the
startling event of the day, and gazing anon into the sparkling depths
of the water, as if she might read in its pellucid depths the secret of
her future.

And she recalled, with a sudden thrill, the gypsy who had told her
fortune last year, saying:

“You will have a handsome, blue-eyed husband, and you will adore each
other; but beware of jealousy, or it will part you forever.”

Leola had laughed at the gypsy then, but now she recalled her prophecy
with a prophetic thrill.

“A handsome, blue-eyed husband! He has blue eyes!” she said--which
showed that her thoughts already reached forward to the unknown future.

    “Our feelings and our thoughts
     Tend ever on and rest not in the present.”

When she returned home she had temporarily forgotten all about her
little tiff with Wizard Hermann that morning, and as she saw him
nowhere about, it did not occur to her mind. She avoided every one,
which was not hard to do, the household consisting of only five
members--her guardian and self, her former governess, who now combined
teaching and housekeeping by way of economy, a fat black cook, and a
man of all work, a misshapen, dwarfish creature of tremendous strength.

The day and night seemed interminably long to Leola, who lay awake many
hours through pure joy of this blissful something that had come so
suddenly into the placid current of her young life. Heaven forefend her
from ever knowing the wakefulness of sorrow!

Bright and early the next morning she was out in the old-fashioned
garden, gathering roses, dewy sweet and lovely, and it was not
difficult to coax black Betsy for a bit of early breakfast before the
others appeared.

Then, because she did not want to seem too anxious, Leola walked the
two miles to Widow Gray’s cottage.

When Wizard Hermann asked at breakfast after the truant, Betsy, who was
bringing in the toast, answered that “young miss” had gone to carry
some flowers to a sick friend.

“Humph!” was his careless rejoinder, little dreaming that the sick
friend was a charming young man who had already carried Leola’s heart
by storm.

Meanwhile the young girl went blithely on her way, glad at heart with
a strange, new emotion, yet not realizing why the world seemed so much
sweeter than yesterday, the flowers fairer, the skies brighter, and all
nature attuned to a diviner melody. Even her own rare beauty had gained
another indefinable charm from the vibrations of love, pulsing joyfully
through all her frame. She knew that she was drawn by invisible cords
to the handsome stranger, but she imputed it to keen interest in one
she had saved from death.

Widow Gray welcomed her with beaming smiles.

“Oh, Miss Mead, such a rapid improvement you never saw in your life!
Why, after he had rested all day and night, he was like another man,
and the doctor let him dress this morning and lie on the lounge in his
room. He says he has no internal trouble at all, and need only stay in
a few days till his head gets well. Wasn’t he lucky? for the doctor
says the tumble might have killed him, and that it was a miracle it
didn’t. But, laws, he’s as right as a trivet, and has taken a poached
egg and bit of toast this morning. What sweet, sweet flowers! Come
right in, do, and see him; he’s expecting you.”

How his blue eyes beamed as she entered with the flowers! Leola would
never forget that look to her dying day.

“You are come at last!” he cried, happily. “I have been hoping and
watching for you more than an hour! I should have been in a fever of
impatience if you had stayed away much longer!”

“And yet it is quite early. See, the dew is not yet dry on the roses I
brought you,” smiled Leola, as she drew a chair close to his side.

“Are you not glad I escaped with so slight injury?” he exclaimed,
joyously. “And only to think that I owe my life to you! How can I repay
you but by devoting it to your service?”

This was very rapid love-making, indeed. Leola, with her very limited
experience that way, felt it was so, yet somehow she could not chide
him. Her heart beat very fast, her cheeks flamed crimson, and when she
tried to look away from him she could not help his gaze from holding
hers in a long look into her soul that was trying to hide from him
beneath her dark, curling lashes. In that moment of pure rapture Sir
Cupid transfixed both their hearts with his cunning arrow. They were
no more strangers; they seemed to have known each other in some past
incarnation.

Leola thought, thrillingly:

“Surely this is love that makes my heart beat so fast and my cheeks
burn under his glance, that holds my own so that I cannot look away! He
is my fate!”

The young stranger was saying to himself, quite as romantically:

“Before I saw this exquisite creature I was madly in love with her
shadow, and now that we have met, my heart is in her keeping forever. I
owe her my very life, and I will be her true knight--and swear eternal
fealty to my liege lady!”

He reached out and caught her hand, saying, deeply and tenderly:

“Forgive me if I seem too hasty, but something urges me on to confess
my love before some unknown fate comes between us. Leola, am I too
hasty, or may I hope to win your heart?”

The lashes fell against her blushing cheeks as she murmured:

“I--I--how strange that you have learned to love me--like that--since
only yesterday!”

“I loved you weeks before I ever met you,” was his startling reply; and
as she cried out in wonder over that, he continued, fondly:

“A few weeks ago, in New York, a young lady loaned me some negatives
to copy. She had made them with her camera while out in the mountains
last summer, she said. Among these negatives were such charming views
of a young girl, that I fell in love with the pictures as soon as I
made them. I did not rest until I found out where the girl lived, her
name, and, in short, all there was to learn about her. Then I took the
train for West Virginia, and on arriving at Alderson I started out the
same morning to find you, Leola; for, of course, you have guessed it
was yourself! Directly my horse took fright; and only fancy my feelings
when I saw you coming toward me on your white pony, a perfect vision
of youth and joy and beauty, and realized that a horrible death might
thrust us apart in another fatal moment. You saved my life, and can you
wonder I look upon you as my fate--the fairest fate that ever life gave
to a man?”

He paused, pressed the hand he held again ardently, and added, musingly:

“How strangely everything has come about! I thought I should have
to get acquainted with you in a very proper way, and go through a
ceremonious courtship before I proposed, but fate took it all out of my
hands. Now, what have you to say to this, my dear girl? Will you let me
hope to win your love?”

“It is yours already,” Leola confessed, with exquisite frankness; then,
as he rapturously kissed her trembling hand, she exclaimed, in wonder
at herself:

“Oh, perhaps you think I am too lightly won when I do not even know
your name!”

“That can be remedied very soon. Call me Ray Chester, an artist, who
wishes he were richer for your sweet sake.”

“Then you are poor?” Leola questioned, gravely.

“Do you regret it?” he asked, sadly.

“I--I--don’t know. Cousin Jessie always advised me never to marry poor.
It is Jessie Stirling, I mean. She loaned you the negatives, did she
not?”

“Yes; but I am sorry she put such notions in your pretty head. Perhaps
you will take back your promise, learning I am poor.”

“Oh, no, no, no! Never! I could not marry any one without love, but
Jessie says she would take a fright if he had a million dollars.
However, she has ‘hooked,’ so she says, a big fish, rich, and young,
and handsome, too, and she wants, when she is married, for me to visit
her so she can make a grand match for me.”

“I will save her the trouble,” said Ray Chester. “Love in a cottage
will be our portion, my darling, but you are so lovely that I shall
paint a picture of you that will perhaps make my fortune!”

Suddenly a shadow clouded her lovely eyes. She had remembered for the
first time her guardian’s threat of yesterday.

“You look sad, Leola. Are you repenting your promise already?” her
lover cried, anxiously.

“I shall never repent. I believe you are my fate!” the girl exclaimed,
earnestly, and to herself she thought:

“I will not tell him of my guardian’s foolish plans for wedding me to a
rich man yet, for perhaps he will give it up after my frank refusal to
obey him. No; I will not even think of it again; he cannot coerce me,
for I will tell him I have already chosen my husband.”




CHAPTER V.

A HONEY BEE AND A HONEY FLOWER.


The Widow Gray had a very romantic turn of mind, and she had not
forgotten her young days yet, so it was easy enough for her to find out
that the two young folks were already deeply in love.

“And no wonder, either,” she said to herself, sagely, “for the two
beautiful young things seem to be made for each other.”

Accordingly, she helped out the romance all she could by insisting on
the girl’s coming every day to help while away the invalid’s lonely
hours, saying, cheerfully:

“For you know that just as soon as Mr. Chester gets well enough to be
going about he will be right up at Wheatlands, paying back your visits
two to one.”

Thus encouraged, Leola came and went daily, making long visits without
exciting any suspicion at home, for she was used to having her own way,
and no one interfered with her liberty.

It was quite a week that Ray Chester was detained at the cottage, for
although he made light of his injuries, he was very much bruised, and
felt stiff and sore, and the little gash on his temple was deep enough
to take some time in healing, and even then it would leave a scar under
his thick, brown curls that would always remain to remind him of lovely
Leola’s bravery in saving his life at the risk of her own.

But that week went away so quickly, so happily, in that golden June
weather, that when it was over they could not realize the lapse of days.

“It seemed like one exquisite day,” they said to each other.

The programme of their days had been something like this:

Leola called every morning on Rex, and remained until the midday meal
at Wheatlands. After appearing at this hour she slipped away again,
returning to the cottage and staying till she had to go home to supper.
Her regularity at these meals warded off any suspicion that she spent
the intervening hours in the company of a very charming young man,
who would render all Wizard Hermann’s schemes to marry her off to her
unknown suitor quite null and void.

After supper, then, came the lonely time, for Leola had to remain at
home and play to the governess on the piano in the dingy parlor, whose
faded hangings had not been renovated for years. As this had been a
yearly practice, she could not omit it without exciting wonder on the
part of the spinster lady who had acted as her governess and companion
since early childhood, and, now that school days were over, looked
after the housekeeping, staying on indefinitely, not seeming to have
either friends or suitors.

Yet, although she was over forty now, Miss Tuttle had not given over a
scarcely-concealed hope of marrying.

As she was very thin and tall, her secret choice had fallen on her
exact opposite, a neighboring widower about fifty, who was rather short
and very stout, and had recently come into a fortune by selling some
valuable coal-lands in Greenbrier county.

Miss Tuttle having been in love with neighbor Bennett when he was in
moderate circumstances, only loved him the harder when he became so
rich that he did not know how to spend his money.

Some neighborly kindnesses he had certainly shown her, but not as many
as she wished, and no amount of scheming had sufficed to bring him to
the point of proposing.

Thus absorbed in her own love-affair, it was no wonder that Miss Tuttle
paid small attention to Leola’s comings and goings, regarding her still
as a pretty child who had heretofore laughed at love and lovers.

So there were none to molest the lovers and make them afraid, for
Wizard Hermann, though he did not give over his scheme, held his peace
and went his way in cunning silence, giving Leola time to get over her
fright.

Even Doctor Barnes, who had not found it necessary to pay but three
visits to his patient, did not know of the romance going on at the
cottage, and being very busy with the measles, just then epidemic in
Alderson and the country round about, he had no time to gossip about
the stranger whose life Leola Mead had saved. As there were none who
knew Ray Chester, so there were none to worry over him; and beneath the
matronly chaperonage of kind Widow Gray their secret love bloomed into
a splendid flower whose strong roots only death could tear away.

      “I love you, sweet: how can you ever learn
    How much I love you?” “You I love even so,
    And so I learn it.” “Sweet, you cannot know
      How fair you are.” “If fair enough to earn
      Your love, so much is all my hour’s concern.”
    “My love grows hourly, sweet!” “Mine, too, doth grow,
    Yet love seemed full so many hours ago.”
      The lovers speak till kisses claim their turn.

“It cannot surely be a whole week; was it not only yesterday?” cried
the doting lover.

But Leola counted off the days to him on her rosy fingers.

“It was Tuesday when first we met--Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday,
Friday, Saturday, Sunday, Monday, and now it is Tuesday again! And I
have been to see you twice every day, Ray! But to-morrow I cannot come
at all, for there is a horrid picnic to which Miss Tuttle insists on
taking me, and I cannot refuse lest she find me out.”

“Why, then, I shall go to the picnic, too. I adore picnics!” cried Ray
Chester.

“But you are not invited. It’s a Sunday school picnic, you see, Ray,
and you are not acquainted with anybody.”

“I’ll invite myself, and get acquainted with everybody there in less
than an hour,” he answered, gayly; and calling to Mrs. Gray, who was
watering her geraniums in the yard, he said:

“Aren’t you going to the picnic to-morrow?”

“Perhaps so--only I shall have to leave you a cold dinner,” she said,
hesitatingly, coming up to the vine-wreathed porch in whose shadow the
lovers were sitting.

“I’ll go with you if you let me!” cried Ray; “and you will introduce me
to everybody there as your new boarder.”

“And to Miss Tuttle in particular; and mind you show her much
attention, Ray, for then she will ask you to Wheatlands,” laughed
Leola, falling into the spirit of the thing, for it came to her
suddenly that by this means she and Ray could go on courting under her
guardian’s very nose without being suspected.

“Miss Tuttle is so vain she will easily think Ray is in love with her,”
she thought, merrily, and so they all laid their plans for to-morrow.

The picnic came off in a beautiful grove, and Widow Gray’s new boarder
kept his word, and got acquainted with everybody there inside of an
hour.

He was specially gracious to the smiling Miss Tuttle, who herself
presented him to Leola, saying:

“Miss Mead, the little girl to whom I have been governess over ten
years.”

The little girl bowed demurely, and said she was glad to meet Miss
Tuttle’s friend, and then she turned carelessly away, and was
particular not to interrupt his chat with the spinster until by his
assiduity he got the coveted invitation to call.




CHAPTER VI.

LOVE’S ENTANGLEMENTS.


“Isn’t he perfectly charming, Leola? As handsome as a picture, and
the prettiest manners I ever saw--so courteous, so kind, altogether
different from some of the country bumpkins about here, who don’t seem
to appreciate ladies as they ought. But really, for the life of me, I
cannot tell which one of us he is courting, for he is so nice to us
both. Sometimes I think it’s you, and then, again, I may be the object
of his affection. I cannot deny there may be a little disparity in our
years, but I do not believe he would mind that, do you, dear?”

This was two weeks later than the picnic, from which it may be inferred
that Ray Chester’s courtship was progressing finely, without let or
hindrance from Wizard Hermann.

Fortune had favored our daring hero, for Leola’s guardian had been
absent from home nearly two weeks, and on returning he had resumed his
laboratory work with such zeal that he remained quite in ignorance of
the fact that a handsome young man, a stranger from the city, was a
daily and welcome caller on the ladies of his family.

His first news of the fact came from Mr. Bennett, his rich and rotund
neighbor, who, perhaps growing jealous over Miss Tuttle, desired to
know if Mr. Hermann had any knowledge of the stranger’s intentions.

“In a word, sir, is the fellow sparking Miss Tuttle or Leola?” he said,
brusquely.

Mr. Hermann, startled, denied any knowledge of the young man.

“I’ve been up to New York for some precious chemicals I required, and I
was nearly ten days absent. Since I returned I’ve been almost too busy
to take time to eat or sleep, and I have not seen or heard of any young
man,” he declared.

The sleek Bennett soon made him acquainted with the facts as he knew
them himself.

“The fellow’s from the city, somewhere away off, good-looking and
dandyfied, an artist, he claims to be. He’s boarding down to Widow
Gray’s, and showed himself first at a picnic, where he came with her
and got introduced to the whole country-side. I’m not saying he isn’t
as pleasant a young chap as I ever met, but I don’t like it, seeing him
in and out at Wheatlands all the time without knowing for sure who he’s
after, Hermann,” he concluded, uneasily.

“I’ll look into the matter this very day and find out what’s in the
wind,” was the reassuring reply.

Bennett’s little ferret eyes looked sharply at him, and he muttered:

“I won’t have any fooling over this here bargain. The mortgage falls
due pretty soon now, and if you fail to keep your word, I’ll foreclose
at once, I swear.”

“I’ll keep it to the letter: don’t you be uneasy,” soothed Wizard
Hermann, adding:

“Have you done anything to help along your own cause, eh?”

“I’ve called several times and fetched the geerls presents of fruit and
candy, and took ’em riding in my fine new turnout, but that dad-blame
dandy was always along, and I couldn’t hardly get in a word edgeways
to the geerl, and Miss Tuttle, she done all the talking to me, so’s I
hadn’t any show at all with Leola,” Bennett muttered, morosely.

“Let’s see; suppose you write a letter and propose formally for her
hand. Tell her how rich you are, and that you’ll give her anything her
heart craves. If she refuses, then I shall have to use my influence,”
Wizard Hermann said, consolingly, wishing he were well out of all this
bother and back in his laboratory at work with his beloved chemicals.

His house and lands were all mortgaged to his rich neighbor, and he
had not a dollar to pay him to prevent foreclosure. It seemed like a
providence when the rich widower cast his covetous eyes on lovely
Leola, and offered, if Hermann could get her to marry him, to release
the debt.

It was fifteen thousand dollars, but Wheatlands, with its
wide-spreading acres, was worth twice as much, and it was terrible to
thus sacrifice the home of his forefathers; so Hermann, who had burned
up all that money in his foolish and mysterious experiments, decided
that Leola must be sacrificed to pay the debt, since there was no other
way.

But how to obtain her consent he did not know, and, since the morning
when she had so angrily repulsed him, the subject had tacitly dropped
between them, Hermann realizing that his end could only be gained by
force and cunning.

Bennett’s story about a possible rival put a new element of trouble
into the affair, so he set himself to investigate matters by calling
the governess to account.

When he summoned her to the library she thought he only wanted to go
over some housekeeping accounts with her, or possibly to pay some
arrears of her salary long overdue.

Visions of a new gown and bonnet floated joyfully before her mind’s
eye, but she was soon undeceived.

“Who and what of this young dandy who is making so free of my house
these two weeks?” he demanded.

Miss Tuttle bridled, and tried to blush like an eighteen-year-old girl.

“Oh, Mr. Hermann, the most charming young man--he’s a boarder at Widow
Gray’s, and is most attentive,” she simpered.

“So I have heard, but who is he after--Leola?” he demanded.

“Oh, sir, no, indeed--that is, I cannot really be sure of his
intentions toward either; he’s so very charming to both of us we cannot
decide between us which he prefers yet--but he does not seem like a
flirt!”

“Amanda Tuttle, don’t be an old fool! How do you suppose any young man
could hesitate between an old woman like you and pretty Leola?” he
replied, brusquely.

“Sir!” Miss Tuttle bridled, and tears came into her eyes.

“Well, well, I spoke roughly, but you should not be so silly,” returned
her employer. “Remember you were not very pretty when you first came
here, and fifteen years has changed you into a faded old maid.”

“I--I--hate you!” she sobbed, pitifully.

“Hard words break no bones,” he said, carelessly.

“If you will pay me my salary I’ll leave Wheatlands forever!” she
sobbed, bitterly, in her humiliation; but he went on, coolly:

“No, I don’t want you to leave; I really need your services, Miss
Tuttle. But as to whether you ever get that money I owe you depends on
your own exertions. I’ve lost everything, and unless Leola makes a rich
marriage I’ve planned for her, I will not have a roof over my head this
day month.”

Miss Tuttle mopped her wet eyes with a little lace-edged handkerchief,
and straightened up, full of breathless curiosity.

“Oh, who is he?” she exclaimed; and thereupon he suddenly confided his
difficulties freely to her, hopeful of her ready co-operation, but,
being totally unversed in the intricacies of a woman’s heart, he made
the mistake of his life.

On learning that the rotund widower, Bennett, whom she secretly
loved, was a suitor for Leola’s hand, the spinster promptly went into
hysterics that she could not have helped to save her life.

She shrieked furiously:

“Oh, the fat villain, the vile deceiver! After all his attentions to me
since his poor wife died, to turn around and fall in love with a chit
of a girl like Leola! Oh, I could tear him limb from limb, the wretch!
And as to marrying him, she shall not--never, never!”

“Oh, really, really!” soothed her employer, but all to no purpose, for,
her heart being touched, she could not restrain her excitable feelings,
but raved on angrily and tearfully for some time, until her emotion
spent itself, the old man having bided his time to this end.

He now observed, sarcastically:

“If you have done making a fool of yourself now, Amanda Tuttle, perhaps
you will tell me what you are going to do about it. You cannot marry
Bennett if he will not have you.”

“No,” she moaned, tearfully; and he continued, coolly:

“Perhaps you will bring suit for breach of promise.”

Miss Tuttle fairly tore her hair in her humiliation.

“Will you, now?” he repeated.

“No,” she sobbed, suddenly realizing that she really had no grounds to
base a legal action upon. She had built her hopes on a baseless fabric
of neighborly politeness, nothing more, and her house of cards had
tumbled to the ground.

The revulsion from long hope to sudden despair was so bitter that it
awakened an intense and jealous hatred for Leola, superseding the
devotion of years.

Hermann realized that he had made a mistake in taking her into his
confidence, and made a masterly retreat, exclaiming:

“Oh, well, well, don’t take it so hard, Amanda Tuttle; you’re too
old to behave like a love-sick chit! It isn’t likely that Leola will
want to marry him, anyhow, and if she refuses, of course I must let
old Bennett take the house and everything, and we can all go to the
almshouse together!”




CHAPTER VII.

BOAST NOT THYSELF OF TO-MORROW.


It was the bitterest hour of her life to poor Miss Tuttle.

While she was talking to old Hermann she heard merry voices out of
doors, and knew that Ray Chester had arrived and was sitting out in the
rose arbor laughing and talking with beautiful Leola, who had turned
out to be her rival when she thought her only a merry-hearted young
girl.

She wondered if it could be true, as her employer said, that no one
would look at her twice when his lovely ward was by, and now she sadly
remembered several little things that made her sure that his words were
true.

Sometimes, when the three went for long walks together, the younger
pair would quite tire her out, but they would insist on going still
further, leaving her waiting under some shady tree with a novel for an
hour sometimes, while they hunted wild flowers or bird’s nests, and
their happy laughter would come ringing back as if they did not miss
her in the least, as now she suddenly realized they did not; they only
wanted her for an elderly chaperon.

But somehow this did not hurt her as much as the seeming perfidy of
Widower Bennett, whom she loved with all her warm heart and at whom she
had been making tender eyes ever since his wife died a year or so ago.
She had persuaded herself she would be the most proper wife he could
find anywhere, and to find Leola preferred before herself was like the
bitterness of death.

She could not help envying and hating the lovely girl with the weakness
of a shallow nature suddenly roused to bitter jealousy, and when she
hurried away from Wizard Hermann’s presence to her own room, she
was half resolved to pack her trunk and go away forever to hide her
humiliation and grief.

But while she bathed her stained face and smoothed her rather pretty
brown hair, she reflected that she had nowhere to go, for all her
relatives were dead, and she had no friends of any consequence.

Poor soul, how she longed for a home and husband of her own! But the
realization of her dream seemed further off than ever now, and as she
stood at her window gulping down her piteous sobs, she heard again,
from the rose arbor, the gay laughter of the lovers, and curiosity made
her descend to them, wondering what had caused their mirth.

Leola, as pretty as a flower in her white gown, had a letter in her
hand, and she and Ray, with their heads very close, were laughing over
it together.

“Oh, Miss Tuttle, this is so ridiculous I have laughed till I cried,”
said Leola. “Only think, I have a lover, and he has made me a proposal
of marriage.”

“And,” added Ray, laughingly, “it is such a brilliant and desirable
match that she is almost sorry she had promised to marry me before she
received it!”

“So you two are engaged?” cried Miss Tuttle, feeling the ground sink
beneath her feet.

“Oh, yes, Miss Tuttle, and I know you are not surprised. Won’t you
congratulate us?” cried Leola’s handsome lover.

“But please, please, don’t tell Uncle Hermann, for I think I begin to
see through his plans now, and he will never consent for me to marry
a poor artist when I could marry his rich neighbor, old Mr. Bennett,”
laughed Leola.

Poor Miss Tuttle gasped for breath, and sank helplessly on a garden
chair, wishing she were dead and buried, so keen was her pain and
humiliation.

“You may read the old man’s letter if you like,” added the girl,
thrusting it into her hand.

The sorrowful spinster, who would have given all she possessed for such
a letter, was forced to read the gushing and awkward love letter of
the rich old widower to the merry girl, who laughed over it with her
handsome young lover, and gayly passed around the fine box of bonbons
that accompanied the epistle.

“The dear old silly! I thought he looked on me still as a little girl,”
she cried. “Now if he had only been sensible and asked you, Miss
Tuttle, it would have been a charming arrangement in point of age and
all that, you know.”

Miss Tuttle winced at the innocent thrust of the happy girl, but she
was so miserable that her pride fell from her like a garment, and she
frankly assented, saying:

“Yes, for I always admired Mr. Bennett, and if he had asked me I would
have accepted him.”

The young people instantly felt very sorry and sympathetic, and Leola
proposed that when she gave him her answer she should give him a hint
that he would be more successful with the governess than with the pupil.

Miss Tuttle was so moved by this offer that she felt all her anger and
jealousy give way, and took Leola into her heart again.

“Oh, if you could only manage it I would be grateful forever,” she
exclaimed. “You know I cannot stay on at Wheatlands when you are gone,
Leola, for people would talk, and besides the fact that he is in
arrears for my salary, we have had a bitter quarrel this morning,” and
then, between tears and sobs, she blurted out all Wizard Hermann’s
plans to the astonished lovers.

Then Leola recalled the morning, three weeks ago, when her guardian had
bidden her prepare to be married in a month to the man of his choice.

“So this is my rich suitor--old Bennett!” she burst out, laughing,
for she could not regard it seriously at all, not realizing Wizard
Hermann’s grim determination.

“Why do you call him old? He is only about fifty or so, and a fine,
handsome man!” complained the tearful governess.

She could hardly understand why the volatile Leola burst into spasms
of the merriest laughter, in which Ray Chester could not help joining.
Alas, they were so gay and happy, they were full of joy and laughter,
little dreaming of the tragic moment near at hand when tears would come
more readily than smiles, and the dull ache at the heart would be like
a piercing thorn.

“If I were you, Leola, I would not feel so gay, for your guardian
swears he will enforce his authority and have you marry Mr. Bennett,
willy-nilly!” reproved Miss Tuttle, anxiously.

The girl looked gayly at her lover, and he caught her little hand in
his, saying, tenderly:

“We aren’t afraid of him, are we, my precious Leola? And if the worst
comes to the worst, we will elope to Washington and get married before
old Bennett knows what we are up to.”

“If you were only rich there needn’t be any trouble. You could pay off
the mortgage for Mr. Hermann, and then he would be willing enough for
you to have Leola!” suggested Miss Tuttle, inquiringly.

Ray’s dark blue eyes looked questioningly into those of his bonny
sweetheart.

“Are you sorry I’m not rich? Would you rather have your old suitor?” he
asked, gently.

“Nonsense; I’d take you without a coat to your back before I would have
that old Falstaff, with all his money,” she answered, laughingly, and
they dismissed the thought of danger, for how could anyone force a girl
to marry against her will?

“But perhaps, after all, I had better see your guardian, and ask him
for his consent to our marriage?” questioned Ray.

The governess shook her head.

“No, do not anger him now, for he is really in such a rage he might set
the dogs on you, who knows?”

“Oh, very well, we need not hurry. It will all blow over by-and-by,”
cried Leola, in her happy-go-lucky way, and presently, when Ray had
taken leave, she went up to her room and penned an amiable but decided
refusal of Mr. Bennett’s offer, saying she would prefer to marry a
younger man, and frankly advising him to turn his attention to Miss
Tuttle, who admired him immensely, and would make him the best wife in
the world.

When she showed this effort to the governess, that lady promptly hugged
and kissed her, and declared she was the dearest girl on earth.

A special messenger carried the missive over to the Bennett place, and
Leola congratulated herself that the episode was closed.

But who can tell what a day may bring forth?

Leola’s whole life had been carelessly happy, for she was blessed with
one of those sweet, sunshiny natures that always look on the bright
side, and find pleasure in the simple joys of even a quiet life. She
made her own sunshine as she went.

For more than three weeks now she had been blissfully happy--so happy
that in all her future she will look back in wonder that such perfect
happiness could be, for, alas, this was the end of those golden days of
love’s sweet dream.

That night, at supper, Wizard Hermann said, casually, as if it were a
matter of small moment:

“Mrs. Stirling and Jessie will arrive on the early train to-morrow.”




CHAPTER VIII.

WINDING A WEB.


When Miss Tuttle and Leola were alone together they talked over the
news, and neither one was very well pleased, the girl, since their
coming would break up her happy days with Ray, and the governess,
because the Stirlings were always supercilious with her, and naturally
made more work for the household.

“I do not see why I should put myself out to wait on pretentious fine
ladies this warm weather, especially when my employer has not paid a
dollar of my salary for five months,” she complained, and Leola added:

“There will be no more good times with Ray, for like as not they will
join hands with Uncle Hermann in persecuting him, and try to have me
marry old Bennett because he is rich. Oh, dear! I’m sorry Ray isn’t
coming back to-night, so I could tell him not to come to-morrow.”

“You might send word to him in the morning before they come,” suggested
Miss Tuttle, and Leola agreed to the plan, which would have worked
itself out all right had not fate decreed that Leola’s little black
messenger should lose the note and Widower Bennett find it.

He was riding briskly toward Wheatlands when his fine bay mare shied,
wildly, at a square white envelope blowing about in the dusty road, and
an impulse of curiosity made him dismount and pick it up.

When he saw Leola’s familiar writing on the sealed envelope, he was
seized with such poignant wrath and jealousy that no scruple of honor
prevailed to prevent his becoming master of the contents.

“To Ray Chester, the young dandy--wonder if she’s giving him the
mitten as she did me yesterday!” he muttered, wrathfully, and broke the
pretty seal of blue wax with a ruthless hand.

The blood bounded hotly through his veins as he read:

 “My Own Darling Ray:

 “You must not come in the morning as usual, because the Stirlings are
 coming, Uncle Hermann says, and I do not want them to know of our
 engagement yet, for they both are very mercenary, and would take sides
 against you, and want me to marry old Bennett, because he is rich,
 while you are poor! As if I would have that dumpy old fright on any
 terms--no, not even if he were President of the United States! Oh,
 why didn’t the old silly lose his heart to dear Miss Tuttle instead
 of me, when she loves the very ground he walks on, and would make him
 such a suitable wife? Fate seems to play at cross purposes with us, my
 darling Ray, but we will outwit our enemies and be happy yet.

 “You had better not come to Wheatlands to-day, but if you will stay in
 all afternoon, I will try to make an errand to Widow Gray’s, and we
 can talk things over and make plans for the future.

 “Oh, isn’t it just hateful the way things seem to work against our
 happiness? Just think, if only Jessie Stirling hadn’t got engaged to a
 fortune already, we might get my rotund suitor in love with her, and
 she could have all the money she craves.

 “Be sure to stay in until I come this afternoon.     Your own loving
                                                               “Leola.”

Widower Bennett stamped upon the ground in a fury, hissing out the
epithets she had used in writing of him in the bitterest voice ever
heard:

“‘Old Bennett!’ ‘Dumpy old fright!’ ‘Old silly!’ ‘My rotund suitor!’
She would not marry me if I were President of the United States!
Why, now, I swear I will marry the little spitfire if it costs me my
fortune!”

In this rage he remounted his mare and galloped on to Wheatlands,
between whose master and himself there ensued an excited interview.

Leola’s letter refusing Bennett’s hand was exhibited in furious anger
by the slighted recipient.

“She would prefer to marry a younger man than me, and she recommends me
to take Miss Tuttle--that skinny, homely old maid, almost as old as I
am!” he blustered, wrathfully, adding:

“You promised faithfully she should marry me, Hermann, but instead of
watching her as you ought, you go poking among your old chemicals,
as blind as a bat, and let her get engaged to a pretty-faced young
jackanapes from the city--a pauper without a dollar to support his
wife on, sir, and yet it lacks only a few days of the time set for my
marriage to that saucy girl, and, mind you, if the ceremony is not
pulled off in due time, I’ll lose not a day, I swear, in foreclosing
the mortgage.”

It was in vain that Wizard Hermann tried to pacify him, saying that he
would certainly keep his promise, and that he was sure that there was
some mistake about Leola’s engagement to young Chester, who was almost
a stranger.

But at this point Bennett produced his proof in the shape of Leola’s
letter to Ray.

“This is worse than I thought, but it does not alter the fact that the
girl shall be your wife, Bennett, for I have sworn to keep my promise,
and I will not fail you, by Heaven!” vowed Hermann, continuing:

“As for neglecting to get matters into shape, that is false, for I
have been quietly working to the promised end all these weeks, but,
having encountered such determined opposition from the girl, I thought
it expedient not to press her too hard, but to depend on force and
cunning, since fair means failed. In fact, one of my objects in going
to New York was to enlist the aid of my clever half-sister, Mrs.
Stirling, in accomplishing the end in view. She will arrive with
her daughter this morning, and although I admit that the case looks
unpromising now, I believe we will soon wind a web around Leola from
which she cannot escape. Go home, Bennett, and rest easy in the thought
that before the end of a week she will be your charming bride.”

The prospective bridegroom beamed with joy and assured Hermann that he
was ready to co-operate in any plan proposed for Leola’s subjugation.

“I will go to any length now to punish her for her contempt, and for
advising me to marry a skinny old maid like Amanda Tuttle when I’m rich
enough to buy a lovely young girl for a bride!” he vowed, coarsely, and
took leave with renewed hope.

In the hall, as he was going out, he encountered Miss Tuttle, and
fancied she might have been eavesdropping from her air of confusion,
but he stalked past her with a curt nod that cut to her tender heart
like a knife.

“Oh, what has come over him when he used to be so friendly? Can it be
that he is angry at Leola’s suggestion that he should court me?” sighed
the poor thing, deprecatingly.

It would have been well indeed if she had been listening, as Bennett
suspected, for then she might have been able to inform Leola of the
perils that threatened her in the joining of forces of Wizard Hermann
and his worldly-wise sister, but she had only been loitering about the
hall in hopes of a little interview when he came out, and tears of
disappointment brimmed over in her kind gray eyes, when he passed her
with so indifferent a greeting.

As she followed to the door and watched him galloping away toward home,
she saw the carriage coming with the Stirlings, and ran to tell Leola
the news.




CHAPTER IX.

WHAT THE ROBINS HEARD.


By-and-by, when Jessie removed the dust of travel, and freshened
herself up with a dainty blue gown that just matched her sky-blue eyes,
the two girls strolled out upon the lawn, and presently found seats in
the favorite rose-arbor, where the robins, nesting overhead, made a
mighty twittering in vain protest against their unwelcome intrusion.

“It is because you are a stranger, Jessie,” laughed Leola. “It is quite
different when Ray and I come here together--they treat us quite as if
we belonged to the Robin family.”

“Who is Ray?” asked Jessie, curiously.

Leola could not help blushing furiously, but she said, as carelessly as
she could:

“Oh, only one of our neighbors!”

She was inwardly furious with herself at this slip of the tongue that
was destined to lead her into self-betrayal. Ah, how true it is that a
name that is close to the heart must often rise to the lips.

To distract Jessie’s attention she asked, all in a breath:

“When are you going to marry your grand, rich lover, Jessie?”

“My wedding will be in October,” fibbed Miss Stirling, who had no mind
to confess that she had lost the prize, and she continued:

“Mr. Olyphant has gone on a yachting tour with some friends now, and I
do not know exactly when they will return. It was expected they would
only be gone two weeks, but they extended the trip. I miss him very
much, and I shall be quite frantic if he stays much longer!”

“Then you love him very much?” queried Leola, with shining eyes.

“Love him! I should say so!” cried Jessie, eagerly. “Why, Leola, he is
as handsome as a picture, tall, with an elegant figure, fine features,
brown, curly hair, and beautiful, laughing blue eyes!”

“So has Ray!” cried Leola, then bit her lips in confusion, sighing to
herself:

“What a lovesick little goose I am, giving away my dangerous secret in
spite of myself!”

“Ray again!” cried Jessie, suspiciously. “Come, now, tell me all about
him, Leola. A neighbor, you said, but I knew no one of that name about
here last summer. You say he has laughing blue eyes like Chester
Olyphant, so you must be fond of him, this neighbor! Confess now, is he
your lover?”

“Oh, nonsense, Jessie, we were talking of your lover!” cried Leola. “Go
on, please, tell me more of him, and of your love for each other.”

“We are perfectly devoted to each other,” declared Jessie,
unblushingly. “How could I help loving him--with all that money!”

“But, Jessie, if Mr. Olyphant were poor, would you not love him just
the same?”

Jessie had a red rose in her hand, and she tore it to pieces with
absent-minded fingers as she replied, bluntly:

“Bah. I wouldn’t permit myself to love a poor man if he were a perfect
Adonis!”

But artless Leola, with rosy cheeks and glowing eyes, retorted:

“Then you do not know how to love, Jessie--not even the meaning of that
sacred word, for I would adore Ray Chester if he had not a second coat
to his back!”

“Ray Chester! There you go again!” cried Miss Stirling, with a violent
start. “Oh, come now, you are madly in love with some man, Leola, and
you have got to tell me all about it this minute!”

“Oh, you are mistaken!” cried poor Leola, trying to flounder out of her
difficulty.

“I am not mistaken! Oh, no! I know all the signs of love, and you
cannot even keep his name off your lips!” cried Miss Stirling,
triumphantly:

It was true: Leola realized it, and felt how impossible it was to keep
hidden the happy secret of her love. Indeed, she fairly ached to tell
it to some sweet, sympathetic girl friend, and why not Jessie, whom
she had known from childhood, and who had always been fairly friendly?
True; the young lady was twenty-three, four years older than herself,
but as each was madly in love with a splendid young man, there was a
bond of sympathy between their hearts that might bring good results if
they fairly understood each other.

She suddenly made up her artless mind to confide in beautiful,
blue-eyed Jessie, and beg her to intercede with her guardian to consent
to her happiness, but because tears were very close to her own dark
eyes, she put Ray aside for a moment to recover herself, saying,
laughingly:

“Only think, Jessie, I have a rich lover, too. Our neighbor, Giles
Bennett, who has gotten rich by coal since his wife died, wants to
marry me, the little girl he used to dandle on his knee! Now, what do
you think of that?”

“A splendid match for you, Leola, and I hope you will accept him,”
declared Jessie, frankly.

“Oh, no, no, no!” Leola cried out, quickly, and Jessie retorted:

“More fool you, then, to let such a chance slip through your fingers!
If I weren’t going to marry Chester Olyphant I’d take old Fatty off
your hands myself. But it seems, from what you let slip just now, that
there’s a poor young man in the case--Ray Chester, you said, and if you
do not tell me the whole story instantly I shall die of curiosity!”

Leola, with her beautiful face glowing like a rose, exclaimed:

“I don’t want you to die, Jessie, so I am going to ‘’fess,’ as the
children say, and, after all, I think I ought to confide in you, for it
is through you all this happiness has come to me.”

“Through me,” gasped Jessie, and her lips went white, while a cold hand
seemed to press all the life from her heart with a swift, horrible
suspicion that centered around that name “Chester,” breathed so sweetly
just now from Leola’s lovely lips.

But Leola did not observe these signs of emotion. She was looking down,
bashfully, and playing with a bunch of red roses in the belt of her
simple white gown. Her beauty was glorified by the love that thrilled
at her heart.

“I will begin at the beginning first of all, and tell you how I saved
Ray Chester’s life,” she said, softly, and, as before, her voice seemed
to linger over that name like a caress.

Miss Stirling did not answer a word. She sat still and pale, listening,
with a horrible presentiment of what was coming, and a hatred for
innocent Leola, a jealous hatred that was more bitter than death.

Leola, still playing with her roses, in bashful confusion, looked down
with the curly lashes sweeping her rosy cheeks, and told her story
briefly, sweetly, and with the simplicity of strong emotion, dwelling
but lightly on her own heroism in saving Ray Chester’s life, and
touching, reservedly, on their love-story, but bringing into prominence
his confession that he had fallen so desperately in love with her
pictures that he had come to seek her and offer his love.

She concluded, gently:

“And although Ray has never once mentioned your name, he did not
deny it when I said that I was sure it was you from whom he got the
pictures; and, Jessie, dear, I am so glad you took those little
snap-shots of me, for through them has come the happiness of my life,
and I shall always be glad Ray saw them and loved me!”

The musical voice ceased speaking, but as Jessie made no answer, Leola
added, ardently:

“He is only a poor artist, my darling Ray, but I am glad, after all,
that he is poor, for he knows I love him for himself alone, for ‘his
own true worth,’ as the poem says, you know, Jessie.”

She gave a violent start when Miss Stirling answered, in a hoarse,
concentrated voice of hatred and bitterness:

“You are a silly little fool, Leola Mead!”

“Oh, Jessie!” and Leola’s voice trembled with wounded feeling.

She looked up and saw that her companion was deadly pale and trembling.

“Oh, what is the matter? Are you ill, Jessie? Have I wearied you with
my story?”

Miss Stirling was very cunning, or very brave. She had got a heart
wound, but she would not cry out against the hand that struck the blow;
after that one passionate outburst she struggled for calmness.

With a hollow laugh, she answered:

“I am very, very tired, after my long journey from New York, and the
sun is very hot, but--I shall be better presently.”

“Shall I go and bring you a little sip of wine?” urged Leola, and
Jessie assented.

She was glad to be alone for one moment, to cry out aloud at the fate
that had parted her from the man she loved.

“Mamma was right, and I was wrong. He was in love with her, after all,
and he came here, instead of going yachting, as he intended--came here
to woo this simple rustic, won by her wondrous beauty, that was more
dangerous than I dreamed! But he shall never marry Leola Mead--never!
Why, I think I would murder her first! And what will he say when he
finds me here? Above all, why is he masquerading under a false name,
and pretending to be a poor artist? Ah, I have it! He means to deceive
the silly girl; his intentions are dishonorable, but I will unmask him,
I will break up the affair, I swear it!” clenching her white hands
desperately.

Leola came back with the wine and a biscuit, and Jessie accepted,
eagerly.

“Wine always clears my brain, somehow, and I have got a lot of scheming
and planning to do,” she thought, as she drained the last drop and
munched the sweet biscuit.

“Ah, you look better now. I am afraid it quite unnerved you, hearing
all about that accident to Ray,” exclaimed Leola, tenderly.

“Yes, yes, it was dreadful; it made my flesh creep. Besides, I was very
tired, you know, and that made it worse; but I am ever so much better
now, thanks to the wine! Really, Leola, you were quite a heroine, and
I cannot wonder that my artist friend fell in love with you, though I
cannot, for the life of me, remember any man by that name, Ray Chester.
I know I loaned your pictures to my lover, Chester Olyphant, but it
cannot be that he came here to deceive a poor innocent country girl
because of her pretty face--oh no! I cannot believe that of my lover.
It is a good thing I came in time to thwart his evil designs, if he
really is my Chester, but--ah!” She looked up, wildly, for a man’s
step crunched on the ground, and the next moment he stepped into the
arbor--Ray Chester, or Ray Olyphant, cool, handsome, smiling, like the
villain in the play.

Miss Stirling sprang to her feet with a thrilling cry. The next moment
she flung herself on his broad breast, her arms about his neck, crying
joyously:

“Chester Olyphant, my own darling, naughty, runaway boy!”




CHAPTER X.

CHESTER OLYPHANT’S CURSE.


Had an earthquake rent the solid ground beneath Leola’s feet she could
not have been more terribly shocked.

She had listened in horror, with a wildly palpitating heart, to the
words that slipped from Miss Stirling’s cruel lips--listened, with
the blood leaping like fire through her veins, to the suspicions
suggested so coolly; but at the sudden and startling finale, when her
rival sprang joyously to the breast of her lover--at this shocking
finale, Leola’s blood, from coursing like liquid fire through her
veins, swiftly congealed to ice, her face went white as snow, her heart
stopped its wild pulsations, and she sank upon the ground, limply, like
one dead.

And overhead the sun shone on in the clear blue sky, and the merry
robins sang among the roses as if love and life had not seemingly come
to an end together for stricken Leola.

But if that terrible swoon had not overtaken her at that crucial
moment, Leola would have seen her lover recoil in anger from Jessie’s
embrace, and push her gently but decisively away, saying, rebukingly:

“Miss Stirling, pray remember that our brief engagement ended long ago,
and that this advance on your part is in the worst possible taste.”

If she had been conscious, instead of lying like a dead girl on the
ground amid the ruins of her happiness, she would have seen Jessie
Stirling sink down and clasp Chester’s knees, and with burning tears
beseech him to love her again because she could not endure life without
him.

She would have heard these passionate prayers repulsed; she would have
heard Chester Olyphant saying, coldly:

“Words are useless, Miss Stirling, for, after all, I never really loved
you, and you entrapped me somehow into an engagement that my heart
never sanctioned. The glamour of passion quickly faded, and when your
own folly gave me an excuse to gain an honorable release from fetters
that began to gall, I was glad to retreat with honor. I have to tell
you things thus frankly, because it is the only way out of your efforts
at a reconciliation that can never be effected, since my whole heart is
given to another.”

All the while he was unconscious of Leola, lying there like a dead girl
on the ground, and he continued, impatiently:

“Pray get up, Miss Stirling; it is embarrassing to have you kneel to
me. Be seated, I beg you, and calm yourself. This is certainly a very
unexpected rencontre. I did not know you were at Wheatlands. Has not
Leola, then, told you she is my promised wife?”

Sinking, sullenly, to the arbor bench as he raised her to her feet, she
hissed, furiously:

“The silly little rustic told me she was in love with a man named Ray
Chester, but how was I to guess that her poor artist lover was the
millionaire society man, Chester Olyphant, masquerading under a false
name and guise, perhaps to deceive a pretty, ignorant country girl,
with more beauty than brains?”

He recoiled in horror from her bold accusation, his handsome face went
white, his blue eyes flashed lightning.

“How dare you?” he thundered, clenching his fist; then it fell
helplessly to his side. “You are a woman; I cannot strike you. I can
only reason and explain.”

“Yes, explain, if you can, for your conduct certainly appears very
suspicious,” Jessie Stirling answered, with a bitter, taunting laugh
that nearly drove him wild.

And yet, in all his anger, he knew she was right; it did look bad, this
masquerade; and, although he despised the girl, he knew he must explain
for Leola’s sake.

Still unconscious that his bonny sweetheart lay upon the ground, so
close that if he stepped backward he must stumble over her senseless
form, he glanced out of the arbor to see if she were coming, and then
turned back to Jessie, saying, hoarsely:

“It looks suspicious, I grant you, but when a man is cursed with
immense wealth, and knows himself constantly the prey of designing
women wanting to marry him for his money, is it not excusable that, by
a little harmless deception, he may win a girl’s heart by love alone,
and thus ensure his future happiness?”

“Bah! a slim excuse!” she sneered; but, restraining his resentment, he
continued, earnestly:

“This, I swear to you, Miss Stirling, was my only reason for the little
deception I practised on Leola, and my plan succeeded well. I have
won for my own the sweetest, truest heart that ever beat, and I had
decided last night to come here to-day to confess all to Leola and her
guardian, and to press for an immediate marriage, in order to save her
from the persecutions of a rich old man, who has Mr. Hermann in his
power, by reason of a mortgage on his property. It was my design to
relieve his embarrassment by advancing the amount myself to pay off the
mortgage. I hope you will accept this truthful explanation, and forego
the gratification of your unwise spite by any persecution of my dear
little love, Leola, whom I must now seek.”

“You will not have far to seek. Look behind you on the ground!” Miss
Stirling answered, with a bitter laugh.

Then for the first time he became aware of Leola’s presence--Leola
lying like a dead girl on the ground at his feet.

In the one moment that he stood gazing down like a statue of despair,
Miss Stirling cried, with triumphant malice:

“Just before you came in Leola and I had had a very satisfactory
explanation, for I recognized you in her description, and I soon made
her understand your villainy. Yes, I told her you were betrothed to me,
and that you were deceiving her. She believed me, and despised you, and
just at the moment of her outcry against you, when you entered and I
sprang to your breast, claiming you for my own, she dropped like one
with a bullet in her heart, and there she has been lying ever since,
and more than likely the poor, deceived girl is really dead of the
shock.”

“Fiend!” he hurled at her, bitterly, and sank on his knees by Leola,
frantically searching for signs of life, kissing her cold, white face,
calling on her in love’s holy name to waken for his sake, and speak to
him again.

Jessie Stirling, listening with outward cold indifference, prayed that
Leola would never answer those vows of love, never open her sweet dark
eyes again, prayed that death might indeed claim her for his own.

And she smiled when all his efforts and all caresses proved vain to
bring life back to the stricken girl--smiled even when he turned to her
with accusing eyes and cried in bitter agony:

“Your false words have broken my little love’s heart, and slain her as
surely as if you had struck a dagger into her breast! You have murdered
an innocent girl who never wronged you, Jessie Stirling, yet you sit
there and smile like the fiend you are! Do you think you can ever know
any happiness after this? No, for my hate will follow you through life,
and my curse will darken your days and make sleepless your nights till
you pray for death’s release!”

He ceased and turned back to Leola, kissing her cold face and hands
with burning lips, then lifting the inert form in his arms, he bore
her toward the house, Jessie Stirling following in a sort of awe,
mixed with rage and revolt against the curse he had pronounced against
her, wondering if there could be any fateful occult power to cause its
fulfillment.

With a heart as heavy as lead, Chester Olyphant bore his burden up the
steps to the hall, where Miss Tuttle met him, shrieking:

“Oh, Heaven have mercy, what has happened to Leola?”

She was appalled when he groaned in anguish:

“Alas, I found her dead in the arbor. Lead the way to her room.”

“Not dead, oh, no, it cannot be! Surely it is only a faint! Come this
way,” sobbed the governess, and in a few moments Leola was placed on
her little white bed among the dainty pillows, no whiter than her face.

Miss Tuttle felt for her heart, but there was no faintest throb to give
hope of life.

“Oh, bring a doctor, do bring a doctor, Mr. Chester! I cannot surely
believe she is dead. Once I saw her lie like this half an hour when she
had fallen from a horse, and she may revive this time, too. Oh, please,
please bring Doctor Barnes at once!” she exclaimed, excitedly, and, as
he flew to do her bidding, she fell to undressing the girl, tenderly,
but swiftly, saying to Jessie, who stood near, looking on, stupidly:

“Run, run to the kitchen and tell Betsy I must have some warm water for
a bath for Leola. She may be in a sort of spasm.”

Jessie Stirling ran out of the room, but she did not carry the message
to the kitchen.

Instead she sought her uncle, to whom she said, with an injured air:

“Oh, Uncle Hermann. I’m so glad I came this morning, for I have
detected a villain in a plot to ruin poor Leola! You remember how I
told you I was betrothed to Chester Olyphant, a millionaire of New
York, and that he was gone on a yachting tour for a few weeks. Well,
this morning I found that, instead of going yachting, as he pretended,
the unprincipled villain, who knew of Leola from me, had come down here
masquerading as Ray Chester, an artist, making love to poor, innocent
Leola. This morning he came upon us in the arbor, and when I exposed
him to the girl, she fell in a swoon so deep that it looks like death.”

A bitter oath shrilled over Wizard Hermann’s lips, and he cried:

“Where is he, the villain? Let me get my hands on his throat!”

“He is gone to bring Doctor Barnes, uncle, but he will be back with him
presently, and were I you, dear uncle, I should wreak vengeance on the
wretch for his double treachery--to me, his betrothed, and to poor,
innocent Leola, whom he has deceived with his false protestations of
love. You need not fear to anger me, for I will never marry him now;
I hate him for his treachery,” raged the artful girl, and her uncle
responded:

“I’ll throw him down the steps and break every bone in his body, if he
ventures back here. But Leola is lying unconscious, you say. Have they
brought her into the house?”

“Yes, she is in her room, and her governess with her. I daresay she
will revive presently, and as I cannot do anything more for her I’ll
go help mamma to unpack our trunks, while you watch for the doctor and
that wretch, Chester Olyphant.”

And hoping in the bottom of her heart that not a bone would be left
unbroken in the young man’s body, hating him because he knew her for
what she was, and because she could never win him back again, she flew
to her mother to relate all that had occurred.

“I told you so. I knew that day that Chester Olyphant was struck with
the girl, and wanted to find her out, but you would not listen to me,
and now you have lost him forever,” was her comment.

“Oh, I knew you’d have to go over all that, but even if I had known it,
how could I have helped it?” was the ungracious reply.

“Then, what do you want me to do?” asked the querulous mother, and she
quailed when Jessie whispered in her ear:

“I want you to go and help Miss Tuttle to revive Leola--that is, to
pretend to, but really to see that she stays dead, for it would be joy
to me to see Chester Olyphant bereaved of his love.”

“Jessie, you are mad, girl! I cannot aid you in such a nefarious
design,” cried the poor, nervous mother, trembling as with a chill.

“Then I will manage it myself!” Jessie hissed, rushing madly from the
room to Leola’s bedside.

But Miss Tuttle gently barred her from the door.

“Doctor Barnes is here, and he will not permit anyone in the room but
myself, not even her betrothed,” she said, curtly, shutting the door
calmly in Jessie’s very face.




CHAPTER XI.

A TERRIBLE DEED.


Wizard Hermann turned about, half-stunned from his interview with
Jessie Stirling, and went back to his laboratory, where he had
been reading a new treatise on one of his favorite hobbies--the
transmutation of the baser metals into gold. The man had no more heart
or conscience than a clam, and his interest in chemistry was greater
than his love for humanity.

The greatest aim he had in life was to prosecute to a successful issue
the two hobbies that had been the ruling passion of his life, to
invent a magic elixir of life, and to create fabulous riches to sustain
a life so lengthened in luxury.

He was mad for gold wherewith to purchase the smallest specimen of a
newly discovered mineral called radium, to which was ascribed the most
remarkable properties ever heard of, but the price of this treasure was
fabulous to a man in his situation, impoverished by a lifetime spent in
this costly and vain pursuit of the unattainable.

His great plan and hope had been to pay off the mortgage on the place,
and to immediately place another upon it, so as to invest a portion
in the new mineral, from which so much was hoped and predicted in the
scientific world.

His rage at the failure of his plan was deep and bitter. With Leola
dead, all his plans would come to naught. Old Bennett would foreclose
the mortgage and ruin him. In his old age he must go forth a beggar
into the world, friendless, and without a place to lay his head.

Through this terrible trick of fate all his plans and aspirations must
be wrecked, and science lose, perhaps, the magnificent discoveries to
which he had devoted his life.

No wonder he was filled with a blind fury against Chester Olyphant,
through whose treachery Leola’s death had come to pass, thus thwarting
all his plans for future gain.

He shut the treatise, whose reading had been so fatefully interrupted,
and went out to watch for Chester Olyphant with murder in his heart.

But while he had been talking with Jessie, and putting away his
precious treatise, time had slipped faster than he knew. Olyphant, who
had met the doctor close by in the road, had quickly returned with him,
and he had gone up to Leola’s room.

The young man, himself a prey to the bitterest anxiety, with hope and
fear commingled, was waiting in the wide, sunny hall for news, when he
came face to face with the grim master of the house, like a ravening
lion seeking for prey.

He forced a smile upon his pallid lips, and exclaimed, eagerly:

“Ah. Mr. Hermann, I have been wishing to see you, sir. I”--

He got no further, for Wizard Hermann, temporarily mad with baffled
hope and bitter resentment, suddenly raised his hand, in whose clenched
fingers gleamed a heavy iron instrument, and in an access of fury
struck unerringly at the brown, curly head bent courteously before him.

It was a blow that might have felled an ox.

Chester Olyphant, taken off guard, ignorant of the fact that he was in
the presence of one temporarily or morally insane, received the blow
full, and went down before it without a struggle, yielding up life in
one short, choking gasp, that was like a thunder-clap in the ears of
his foe.

For, all in a moment, there came over the frenzied murderer a wild
realization of his deadly crime, and bending down to peer at the still,
white face of the fallen man, he groaned in horror of his sin and its
consequences:

“Dead! dead! Why, I did not mean to strike so hard! I--I--never thought
one blow could kill! What shall I do? No one must find me here. I must
fly”--

At this incoherent moment, while he was rising from the body of his
victim, there came slouching through the wide, sunny hall the figure
of his man of all work, Joslyn, a strange, hideous, taciturn man, yet
devoted to his master’s service through many thankless years.

Joslyn stopped and stared in bewilderment, glaring at the uncanny scene.

Wizard Hermann, peering up at him in consternation, whimpered like a
beaten hound:

“I didn’t mean to hit so hard. He--he--was too easy to kill! If they
find me here they’ll hang me for murder! Save me! save me! Joslyn!”

The hideous servitor, conscious of but one thing--his master’s
peril--was quick to hear and heed.

At any moment some one might come in at the open door, and one glance
meant detection of the hideous crime his master had wrought.

Joslyn looked stupid, but his master knew it was only in looks. His
brain was keen and alert, as he had proved many a time before.

Just one moment he paused, hesitated; then his dull eyes gleamed
beneath the bushy brows, and he was prepared for action.

They were just in front of the library door, and, swooping down like
an eagle on his prey, he caught up Chester Olyphant’s limp body in his
long, wiry arms, and dragged him inside the room. Hermann staggered
after him with quaking limbs and a ghastly face; then Joslyn softly
shut and locked the door.

The two old men, who had grown gray in each other’s confidence and
service--grim old men, who had outgrown pity or interest in youth and
love and all that was sweetest in the world, now stood face to face,
and between them, on the floor, that limp body that, now cold and
senseless, had been but a little while ago a picture of manly strength
and splendor, with a heart throbbing fast with the passion of youth.

“Who saw you do it?” Joslyn demanded, gruffly.

“Not a soul!” whimpered the craven wretch. “You see, I did it in a
passion before I thought, because he”--

But Joslyn’s coarse, hairy hand, upraised, commanded silence.

“Don’t waste time now to tell why ’twas done. The thing is that you did
it, and that you must hide it or swing for it,” he said, with rough
emphasis that made his master cower again like a beaten hound.

The servant knelt down and examined the silent victim.

“Dead as a door-nail, an’ gittin’ cold a’ready! You hit him a turrible
whack, sir, on his head! Must have fractured his skull, the way it
feels.”

“I didn’t know I had such strength. I hit harder than I meant.
I--I”--began Hermann, weakly, but the man shut him off.

“No use cryin’ over spilt milk. What’s done is done, an’ now we got to
hide the corp, an’ let it go as one of the myster’ous disappearances we
read about every week in the newspapers!”

“Joslyn, how clever you are! Oh, if we can only manage it! But I cannot
think clearly. My brain’s on fire ever since Jessie came with her
terrible story, and tempted me to kill him because of the hearts he
had broken--hers and Leola’s, too, so that she wanted vengeance on him
for their wrongs. So I seized that iron wedge and went to watch for
him, and the minute he spoke to me I struck, and he fell. He’s dead,
and he deserved it. I am not sorry, only I don’t want to be found out,”
Hermann mumbled on, unheeded by the other, who stood with his brows
wrinkled in profound thought.

He chuckled, suddenly, and Hermann muttered:

“You have a thought, clever Joslyn; you will save me!”

“Perhaps so, sir, if I can work out my plan.”

“Yes, yes?”

“You know what’s under this floor, sir?”

“The underground passage where my ancestors used to hide from the
Indians--yes, yes. Can we drop him through?”

“Sure, if I can get the tools in here to rip up some flooring and put
it back. Will you stay here, locked in, while I push them into the
window, for I daren’t bring them into the hall.”

“Yes, go, quickly,” and he let him out and closed and locked the door
again, waiting, with a chill of horror at his heart, of that white and
silent thing lying at his feet.

Presently there was a noise outside the window, and he went and took in
the tools that Joslyn reached up to him. Then he admitted him, and they
went at their grewsome work of hiding the mute witness of that terrible
crime.

In the midst of their task came a light rap on the door.

“Uncle Hermann, I want you!” Jessie said, excitedly.

“I am engaged--excuse me,” he bawled, hoarsely, through the keyhole.

“All right,” she answered, after a moment’s hesitation; “I only wanted
to tell you about Leola. Doctor Barnes says she is not dead, after all,
and he is bringing her around; do you hear?”

“Yes, I hear, Jessie. Now go away, like a good girl; I cannot be
disturbed,” he assured her, turning back to Joslyn in time to see him
lift Chester Olyphant’s body and let it fall through the opening in the
floor.




CHAPTER XII.

A WAYSIDE FLOWER.


    “Look in my face; my name is Might-have-been;
     I am also called No-more, Too-late, Farewell.”

Leola sat up in bed among the white covers, scarcely whiter than her
face, and smiled wanly into Miss Tuttle’s anxious eyes.

“I am sorry that I am better. I wish I had died,” she said, bitterly.

For twenty-four hours she had been threatened with brain fever, but now
the crisis had passed, and she was improving.

Doctor Barnes, who had been very uneasy all this time, had said just
now she would soon be well--that her youth and fine constitution had
tided her safely over the danger point.

These two days Miss Tuttle had nursed her most carefully, admitting, by
the doctor’s orders, no one but himself.

In vain Jessie Stirling pleaded to come in and help nurse the patient;
Miss Tuttle sent her ruthlessly away.

“Doctor Barnes exacts perfect quiet, and trusts her only to me,” she
said, proudly.

Jessie retired, baffled and angry, to cogitate over the mystery of
Chester Olyphant’s disappearance.

For since he had gone to bring the doctor to Leola, no one had seen his
face.

Jessie had by no means expected him to retreat from the field of
battle. Instead, she had looked for him to march off with victory on
his banners, the battle gained, the prize won. She knew that if Chester
could get an opportunity to tell her uncle that he was rich and would
pay off the mortgage on Wheatlands, he could easily gain his ends and
marry Leola.

It was in dread of this that she had incited him to anger against
Chester, hoping to prevent their coming to an understanding.

But Chester’s unexplained disappearance had startled and surprised
everyone, for only this morning Mrs. Gray, the widow at whose cottage
home he boarded, had come to Wheatlands to seek him, saying he had not
been back for two days.

Diligent inquiry revealed the fact that Doctor Barnes was the last
person who had seen him at all, having left him alone in the hall the
day he had brought him to see Leola.

Widow Gray was quite alarmed, and did not know what to think.

“He certainly expected to return, for he did not take his trunk away,”
she said, but Mr. Hermann made light of the matter.

“Go home, and don’t worry--he has perhaps been called away by a
telegram, and will be back in due time,” he said.

“Indeed, I hope so, sir. He was a very fine young man, and I hope he
has come to no harm,” she protested.

And again the wizard laughed:

“How could he come to harm in broad daylight in my house?”

“That’s so, sir; I don’t see how he could indeed, but I hope I shall
hear from him soon, for I had bad dreams last night, and my mind
misgives me,” she sighed.

Then she asked if she might see the sick girl, but was told she was too
ill. Thereupon she went away, sighing, with a very long face, saying to
herself:

“If I had told that horrid old man he would not have believed me, but
last night I heard spirit voices sobbing in the pine tree outside my
window, and whenever I hear that, it’s a sure sign of trouble.”

While she went slowly out of the gate Miss Tuttle was watching her
from the window, and she said to the pale girl sitting back among the
pillows:

“There goes Mrs. Gray. I suppose she has been to inquire about you.”

Leola’s wistful eyes looked at her with a mute question, and she
answered, gently:

“You’re thinking of Mr. Chester Olyphant, I know, dearie, and I had
better tell you and get it off your mind. He has gone away.”

“Gone away!” Leola repeated, trembling, her lips white, her eyes somber
with misery.

“Yes, gone away, and a good riddance, I say, for how could he face you
again after all that has happened? He has nearly broken Miss Stirling’s
heart as well as yours, and she vows she will never speak to him again
for your sake! Only think of the great monster, engaged to her, and
coming off down here to make love to you, because you were so pretty
and so innocent. There was not a word he could say in his own defence,
nothing but to sneak away like a hound beaten for stealing! Yes, he is
gone, and I hope that is the last of him!”

Leola’s white, trembling hands hid her face, but presently she spoke
wearily through her fingers:

“I have just one favor to ask you, dear Miss Tuttle. Never mention his
name to me again, so that I may find it easier to forget.”

Alas, would she find oblivion of pain so easily?

    “When vain desire at last and vain regret
     Go hand in hand to death, and all is vain,
     What shall assuage the unforgotten pain
     And teach the unforgetful to forget?”

To her own heart the unhappy girl was saying:

“Oh, why did I not die when I found that he was false, and my dream of
love over? Why linger on when the charm is gone from life, and I must
live on, shamed, humiliated, by the thought that Jessie Stirling’s
proud, rich lover stooped from the height where he should dwell to
pluck a wayside flower, then trample it beneath his feet? Oh, it is
torture to think he held me so lightly!”




CHAPTER XIII.

IN THE SPIDER’S WEB.


She wondered that she did not die of her shame and despair, so keen
was her pain and humiliation, but the day wore to sunset and she was
still alive, although the face of the whole world had changed to her
in twenty-four hours, so that the blue of the sky and the gold of the
sun no longer seemed fair, and the birdsongs in the trees outside had
changed to notes of sadness that fell coldly on her heart.

There came to her a sharp memory of the little song she had once loved,
the one that had lingered on her lips the day she rode so blithely away
on Rex to meet her fate in the beautiful dark blue eyes that had been
so false and fair:

    “Honey-flowers to the honey-comb,
     And the honey-bees from home.

    “A honey-comb and a honey-flower
     And the bee shall have his hour.

    “A honeyed heart for the honey-comb
     And the honey-bee flies home.

    “A heavy heart in the honey-flower
     And the bee has had his hour.”

“I am going to let you sit in this easy-chair by the window to watch
the beautiful July sunset, and Mr. Hermann wants to come in and see
you,” Miss Tuttle said, placing the chair ready and dressing her
patient in a soft white wrapper.

But it was Jessie Stirling who pushed open the door and tripped in,
first taking advantage of its being unlocked.

“Poor dear, how changed you look, how pale, how ill! It was a terrible
shock to you to find out how Chester Olyphant had deceived you, was it
not?” she twittered, loquaciously, coolly taking a chair in front of
Leola, and adding:

“You may well fancy it was a shock to me, too, to find him down here
flirting with you when I thought him safe on a yacht thousands of
miles away. Did Miss Tuttle tell you he has gone away in a huff at
being found out, and without leaving any word for me? Yes, he has gone,
and at first I vowed I never would forgive him his flirtation with you,
but--well, when I go back to New York perhaps I will relent, after he
has coaxed long enough. We really are very fond of each other, you
know, though Chester cannot help flirting any more than he can help
breathing. I shall never let him know how hard you took it, for that
would flatter his vanity too much!”

His vanity, dear heaven! and she had believed he loved her, thought
Leola, with silent shame and despair.

She could not bear to look at Jessie, his jubilant betrothed, sitting
there in her pretty fashionable gown and fluffy flaxen locks in a wavy
aureole over her white brow. She wished secretly that the girl would go
away and leave her alone with her wounded heart.

But Jessie went on, eagerly:

“When I consent to forgive him for this I shall scold him roundly,
you may be sure, Leola, and I shall pretend to him that after that
little fainting fit you came around all right, and despised him for his
duplicity, and vowed you would never see him again. He shall not think,
the vain creature, that you wore the willow an hour for his sake. I
will pretend you had other lovers to take his place. That will be true,
for there is Mr. Bennett, who adores you, although you have flouted him
so badly. As for me, if I were in your place I’d marry Bennett out of
hand, to show Chester Olyphant how little I cared about him! That would
take the conceit out of him quicker than anything you could do!”

So she twittered on artfully until Leola’s lovely face grew crimson
with shame at her own weakness in caring so much for one so unworthy.

Without saying one word, her somber eyes turned to the setting sun; she
writhed with secret shame that Jessie could think she cared so much
for her frivolous lover. Oh, if she could only tear this pain from
her heart; only smile again as before this cruel blow that had nearly
struck her dead with its agony.

As Jessie chattered on, she began to feel a passionate contempt for the
man as the pretty blonde depicted him, shallow, vain, unscrupulous.

    “Shall it not be scorn to me to harp on such a mouldering string:
     I am shamed through all my nature to have loved so slight a thing!”

With sudden angry passion, her dark eyes flashing, she turned upon the
artful girl:

“Please speak no more to me on that subject, Jessie. You weary me.
I despise the man. I wish never to hear his name again!” she cried,
bitterly, and her weakness seemed to fall from her, in passionate
contempt.

“Poor Leola, I cannot blame you,” cried the triumphant blonde,
cheerfully, just as the door opened again, and Wizard Hermann glided
softly into the room.

“Ah, Leola, you are better. I am very glad,” he said, in a smooth, oily
voice, taking the chair Jessie vacated, saying she must go to mamma.

She nodded, wearily, without speaking, wishing they would all leave
her alone, for every human face seemed hateful to her now.

She would not meet his eyes, or she would have seen that he looked ill
and nervous, too, and that his always furtive, unpleasant manner had
grown more marked and repellent still.

“Miss Tuttle,” he added, “you may leave the room. I have private
affairs to talk of with my ward.”

When they were quite alone he turned back to her, saying, earnestly:

“I have come, Leola, to explain my private affairs to you, and to make
one more appeal to you to help me out of my trouble.”

She listened without replying, the deep somber eyes fixed on the fading
sunset beyond the distant hills, and Wizard Hermann continued:

“For years I have been heavily in debt, and had to borrow money from my
rich neighbor, Mr. Bennett, to meet my living expenses and take care
of you, Leola, in proper style for a pretty young girl. You have had
your governess, your horse, your clothing, without a care on your young
mind, but I, in order to meet your expenses, and keep this roof over
your head, have been obliged to place a mortgage of fifteen thousand
dollars on Wheatlands, and to-morrow the mortgage falls due. If Bennett
forecloses, as he swears he will, we shall all be turned out homeless.”

It was on her lips to say that she did not care, that nothing really
mattered to her now, but she bit her lips and held back the words,
waiting silently to the end.

“I have no means of paying my debt; I cannot possibly raise the money,
but neighbor Bennett has been very generous; he has offered to forego
his pay, to destroy the mortgage, on one condition. Are you listening,
Leola?”

She nodded, without turning her gaze from the sunset hills, and he
continued, eagerly:

“I think you know what is coming, Leola. Bennett has fallen madly in
love with you, and wants you for his wife. If you consent he will
settle a hundred thousand dollars on you, and forego the debt I owe.
As for the rest, when you are once his wife, you can wind the foolish
old man around your fingers like a ribbon, and have your own way in
everything. If you refuse he swears he will turn us all out of doors in
twenty-four hours.”

He paused and waited, but she did not speak, and realizing how futile
would be the attempted exercise of authority, he fell to pleading:

“Can you let this terrible calamity befall us, Leola--me in my old age,
you in your youth and beauty? Why, we would not have whereon to lay our
heads if we anger Giles Bennett.”

The somber dark eyes turned to him, questioningly:

“I--I--have always supposed that you held money in trust for me, sir.
I did not dream that I was an expense to you, as you say,” exclaimed
Leola. “Have I then no friends who can help us in our need?”

“Not one, Leola, for I know nothing of your relations. To be plain, I
took you, a pauper child, from the almshouse, for pity’s sake, and have
reared you as well as though you had been my own daughter. The secret
of your birth I kept, and it shall never pass my lips. But in the hour
of my misfortune I appeal to you to pay the debt of gratitude you owe
me--a debt that you can only pay by marrying Giles Bennett to-morrow.”

An icy shudder shook her weak frame; she felt that death were sweeter
than such a fate.

But the man who had befriended her young life was waiting with haggard
eyes for her answer--waiting for her to save him from despair.

And she, the pauper, nameless, homeless, save for Wizard Hermann’s
charity--would it not be monstrous ingratitude to refuse his prayer?

She faltered, recklessly:

“I will marry the man!”




CHAPTER XIV.

A LITTLE CONSPIRACY.


When the rash words had passed Leola’s lips a great trembling seized
upon her, a horror of life she had never felt before, and she longed to
scream out aloud to him that she must take back her promise--that she
could not bind her beautiful, throbbing young life to oily, unctuous
Giles Bennett, the man more than twice her age, and who in no way could
be her fitting mate, not if he paid a million dollars instead of what
he offered.

But when she saw Wizard Hermann’s radiant face, she dared not utter her
passionate protest against being sold in the market like a beautiful
Circassian slave to the highest bidder. She feared a fit of violence,
or that he might fall down dead at her feet of the revulsion of feeling
from relief to disappointment.

She restrained the words that ached in her throat, and leaned back,
helplessly, in her chair, her eyes half shut, her face death-white, her
senses reeling, and heard, half-consciously only, the profuse thanks he
was pouring out, and the dazzling picture he was painting of her future
as a rich man’s wife, even adding, consolingly, that the fat old man
might drop off any day from apoplexy, and leave her a rich and happy
young widow.

“Go, leave me,” she sighed, faintly, and he hurried out, nothing loath,
to spread the good news.

The next thing Leola knew she was in bed again, and Miss Tuttle was
reviving her with cold water on her face mixed with hot tears that fell
from her own eyes.

“Oh, Miss Tuttle, what are you crying about?” she sighed, curiously.
“Is it true, then, that he made me--promise to--to”--

“To marry Giles Bennett; is that what you mean? Yes, he says you
promised to marry that wretch to-morrow. Oh, oh, oh, this will break my
heart!” and poor Miss Tuttle and Leola, clasped in each other’s arms,
mixed their tears together.

When they grew a little calmer Leola explained how the promise had been
extorted from her by appeals to her gratitude.

“Oh, do you think it can be true? Am I only a pauper, taken from the
almshouse, for charity’s sake--perhaps nameless, too?” she sobbed,
bitterly.

Miss Tuttle could give her no comfort, for although she had been
Leola’s governess from the age of three, she had never fathomed the
mystery about her charge. But she tried to reassure her, saying:

“Do not brood over it, dear girl, it is possibly one of old Hermann’s
false tales to coerce you into obedience. I should sooner believe that
he has appropriated to his own use money that belonged to you, and
thinks he can make it up to you this way.”

“To live with Giles Bennett as his wife--that old Falstaff of a man!--I
loathe the prospect!” sobbed Leola.

“While I envy you with all my heart!” exclaimed the governess. “Oh,
Leola, how strangely fate plays at cross purposes with human beings!
How gladly I would change places with you and become his wife!”

“Oh, that you could, dear soul!” Leola answered, and neither one slept
that night for the tumult of their thoughts--Leola’s all grief and
repugnance, Miss Tuttle’s all envy and wounded love--and when the
sunshine of the July morning peeped into the windows their faces were
haggard and pain-drawn, and both felt as if the day of execution had
dawned, for Hermann had told the governess to prepare Leola to be
married at sundown that evening, when the carriage would be waiting to
convey her at once to her new home.

With heavy eyes they looked into each other’s faces, wondering how they
could escape their doom, and Leola cried, desperately:

“There is one chance left, and I shall take it. When I have paid my
debt of gratitude to my guardian by marrying Giles Bennett, I--I--shall
not be among the living to-morrow!”

“Do you mean it, Leola?”

“I swear it,” answered the girl, recklessly, and Miss Tuttle knew,
by the somber gaze of the beautiful dark eyes, that it was true.
Life, that had flowed along like a silvery rippling stream between
flower-fringed banks, had suddenly become a muddy torrent rushing
onward to destruction, and naught could stay its onward course.
Desperate, reckless, she was ready to rush unbidden into the Great
Beyond, daring the unknown future in terror of the awful present.

“Oh, Leola, you must not! It would be a terrible sin! Promise me you
will not!” cried the poor soul, timorously.

But Leola’s shut lips kept a deadly silence, and Miss Tuttle continued,
conciliatory:

“If you could escape this marriage, Leola, would you then be willing to
live?”

The sudden gleam of hope in the dark eyes assured her that Leola might
yet find something to live for in her shadowed life, and she continued:

“Dearie, I have a plan that might help you. I’ve been turning it over
and over in my mind, but I never should have broached it had it not
been for your dreadful threat.”

“Tell it to me,” implored the girl, and glancing cautiously around,
that none might overhear, Miss Tuttle bent and whispered some rapid
words into Leola’s ear.

A light began to dance in the dark eyes, the pale lips smiled a little,
and Leola cried:

“It will be a terrible risk to run, but if you can manage it and are
not afraid, I will help all I can, for I long to punish Giles Bennett
for his meanness!”

“I’ll take all the responsibility for everything,” smiled Miss Tuttle,
glowing with eagerness. “Don’t you worry one bit, Leola; it will all
come right in the end. But, oh, dear, I’ve got to put in a busy day
getting the bride ready.”

“Make her as pretty as you can, and let the veil be very thick,”
laughed Leola, with renewed good humor. “And, by-the-way, Miss Tuttle,
you are to tell my guardian that before the ceremony begins Giles
Bennett must destroy the mortgage in my presence, or I will not marry
him at all.”

So the busy day began, for the whole household was in a state of
excitement over the sudden wedding.

Mrs. Stirling and her daughter entered heartily into the spirit of the
affair, and set the servants to work transforming the dingy parlor into
a floral bower, with wildflowers and evergreens.

The scheming pair were delighted to think of getting rid of Leola so
easily, hoping that some fortunate turn of fortune’s fickle wheel might
yet bring back Chester Olyphant into Jessie’s power.

While they worked downstairs on the parlor, Miss Tuttle reported
herself as very busy upstairs, getting ready the simple outfit of the
bride, and packing her trunk for the flitting. Leola would not admit
anybody else inside the door. She said she was too busy and too nervous.

Inside that locked door there were strange doings, to be sure.

You would have thought them a pair of amateur actresses, from the way
they went on.

The governess had dragged down from the garret a little old trunk
containing some stage properties that had once upon a time belonged to
an actress who had died while on a visit to Wizard Hermann’s mother.
Her relatives had never taken away the box, and many a time Leola had
amused herself looking over the queer things on rainy days when she
could not go out.

She and Miss Tuttle were amusing themselves again, brushing and combing
over the old wigs, Leola trying on the sedate brown front, and Miss
Tuttle the curly golden one, that certainly took fifteen years off her
age, after Leola made up her sallow face with rouge and powder.

Then Miss Tuttle tried on Leola’s best gown, the dark brown cloth
with the silk waist and loose jacket. The pretty brown toque was not
unbecoming, with the double veil of white dotted malines, and Leola,
who had never expected to smile again, had to giggle like a little
school girl at the tout ensemble.

“Oh, Miss Tuttle, you will make a lovely bride! I am sorry I shall not
have a handsome gift for you!” she cried.

“You will have given me the desire of my heart!” cried the governess,
so seriously and gratefully that Leola laughed harder than ever,
thinking she was certainly very easy to please, since portly Giles
Bennett could fill the measure of her happiness. It made her think
of the old adage Betsy, the cook, had repeated to her the other day:
“Ever’buddy to deir taste, missie, as de ole ’oman said when she kissed
de cow.”

However, it was very lucky for Leola that Miss Tuttle was so infatuated
with the rotund widower that she was willing to win him by hook or
crook, so her laughter grew more and more joyous as she added, merrily:

“Be sure that you put a little water in all the kerosene lamps about
the house, so that they will flicker and grow dim.”




CHAPTER XV.

SURPRISES ALL AROUND.


Very dimly, indeed, burned the lamps among the floral decorations
as the family at Wheatlands gathered in the parlor for the wedding
ceremony, Jessie and her mother in full evening dress, though Leola had
sent word down that she would be married simply in her traveling dress.

Outside the gates waited the brand new carriage, with prancing white
horses, that had brought Giles Bennett and the Methodist preacher who
was to perform the ceremony, and in the parlor the bridegroom waited,
spick and span in his new black suit, for his bonny bride. Jessie
Stirling, at the piano, had already begun the first low notes of the
wedding march, and to that sound came Leola slowly down the stairs on
the arm of Miss Tuttle, having peremptorily declined her guardian’s
escort.

Mrs. Stirling thought it rather ridiculous, as they came in sight,
that that silly old maid, Miss Tuttle, had chosen to wear a hat and
veil like the bride at the ceremony, but she did not give the poor,
drab-faced creature a second look, she was so intent on watching the
proceedings.

Wizard Hermann met the pair at the door, and taking the golden-haired
girl by the arm, led her to the rotund bridegroom waiting nervously for
his happiness.

The minister cleared his throat ready to proceed, but the bride stood
still for a moment, facing Giles Bennett, and her low voice said,
distinctly:

“The mortgage on Wheatlands--the prize for which I am sold, sir--have
you brought it as agreed upon?”

He produced a folded paper, and she beckoned to her guardian.

“Examine this paper. Is it bona fide?”

He answered, huskily:

“Yes.”

She looked at Giles Bennett.

“You are willing that I destroy this paper, on condition that I marry
you immediately afterward?”

“I agree to your conditions,” he said, and directly the fragments of
the mortgage fluttered, like a miniature snowstorm, from the bride’s
white-gloved hands to the floor.

Then she took his arm, and they moved across to the waiting minister,
who began to pray.

In the excitement no one noticed a rapping on the open hall door, nor
that poor Miss Tuttle, instead of attending the bride as maid of honor,
had sunk into a low seat near the door with her handkerchief hiding her
veiled face.

The music played on softly, like a sigh, the dim lights flickered
forlornly among the fragrant flowers, and the short marriage ceremony
of the Methodist Church in less than ten minutes made Leola Mead the
bride of Giles Bennett, who had bought her for her beauty like a slave
in the Circassian market.

And just as he pronounced the pair man and wife the man who had been
knocking unheard at the hall door strode impatiently to the parlor and
looked within at the unexpected sight of a wedding party.

He was a middle-aged man of distinguished appearance, with dark eyes,
grizzled auburn hair and a face bronzed as from travel. No one saw him
as he waited at the door, while the witnesses crowded forward with
eager congratulations to the smirking bridegroom and the veiled bride.

Last of all came the one who had been sitting yonder sobbing in her
little lace handkerchief, and taking first the hand of Giles Bennett,
she exclaimed, earnestly:

“I congratulate you, sir, on winning this rare prize. She will make you
very happy, I know.”

Then, with a soft laugh that startled everyone, she threw her arms
about the bride, half-sobbing:

“Dear, dear governess, I hate to give you up, even to our kind
neighbor, Mr. Bennett, for you have loved him so well, I know it is for
your best happiness to leave me!”

With a dexterous movement of her hand she flung off her veil, hat and
wig in one gesture, and stood revealed, beautiful, golden-haired Leola,
masquerading in Miss Tuttle’s worn and threadbare black silk gown, a
skimpy thing, too short and too tight, and likely to burst with the
peal of laughter that shrilled over her rosy lips at their amazed looks.

They all began talking wildly at once, and staring in wonder at the
veiled bride, who suddenly followed Leola’s example, and threw off hat,
veil and golden wig together, showing Miss Tuttle’s pretty brown waves
of hair, and her pale, rather frightened face that turned piteously to
her new made husband as she faltered, weakly:

“I planned this deception to save my dear Leola, because she vowed that
rather than live with you, after she had paid her guardian’s debt, she
would kill herself this very night. I couldn’t let her do that, the
poor girl, who hasn’t a friend on earth but me, and whom I love as if
she were my own child, so, to save her, I carried out this trick, and
I am your wife, sir, whether you own me or not. But though I am not as
young and pretty as Leola, I will be a better companion for you, Giles,
than she would ever be, for she fears and hates you, while I have
always respected you highly ever since I knew you, and will try to make
you a good wife if you will overlook the little ruse by which I won
you.”

They were all so dazed that no one had tried to interrupt her, but now
Giles Bennett, turning furiously on Hermann, cried:

“You hound, you let me be tricked into this fraud, but it shall avail
you nothing! I repudiate this marriage and the whole transaction. The
destruction of that paper shall not prevent me from getting back my
money from you. The law will protect me in my rights.”

“I protest I had no hand in this deception. I meant honestly by you,
and to prove my word I will have nothing more to do with those women,
who have united in this effort to make you a laughing stock, and to get
me into trouble. They shall both leave my roof to-night and forever,
Giles, but I beg you will be patient with me and grant me a little
more time before you bring suit to recover your money,” began Hermann,
abjectly, when a ringing voice cried, “Hold!” and the unobserved
stranger at the door strode, uninvited, into the room, adding:

“Ah, Henry Hermann, you know me. I have come at last for my daughter,
Leola, and it seems I have unearthed some villainy on your part. Will
some one tell me the meaning of all this excitement?”

Leola flew to him with a cry of joy.

“My father, oh, my father! You have come at last!”

The bronzed stranger clasped her to his heart and kissed her beautiful
lips again and again, exclaiming:

“Sweet image of your lovely mother, now an angel in heaven, we shall
never be parted again! But now tell me the meaning of this strange
scene.”

Clinging fondly to his arm the girl answered, spiritedly:

“That old Falstaff there held a mortgage on my guardian’s estate for
fifteen thousand dollars, and offered to cancel it if I would become
his wife. So I was persecuted into giving him my promise, and to save
me from despair and suicide my dear governess planned to deceive them
and put herself in my place.”

“But it won’t do any good,” blustered the angry Bennett, “I won’t take
the old girl on any terms, and I’ll have my money out of Hermann all
right, and that soon!”

He recoiled in surprise at the stranger’s contemptuous laugh.

“Your mortgage is not worth the paper it was written on, for I hold
a prior one that Hermann executed to me over thirty years ago, for
thirty thousand dollars, as much as the full value of his estate. This
money he had from me before my Leola was born, because I admired his
scientific attainment and wished to make him independent, so that he
could prosecute his experiments in chemistry. At my dear wife’s death
I went abroad with an exploring party to drown my grief. As Hermann’s
mother was a kinswoman of mine, I left Leola with him, giving him ten
thousand dollars for taking care of her, but it seems that he has
betrayed his trust, and but for this noble governess here my poor girl
would have been betrayed into a wretched marriage. I have no more use
for so unworthy a guardian, but I shall not take revenge by foreclosing
my mortgage on his home. I shall leave him in peaceable possession the
term of his life; then Wheatlands will revert to my daughter, Leola.
For the rest, as soon as Leola can pack up to leave I shall take my
dear girl away with me to New York, and if Mr. Bennett repudiates his
pretty bride, she may accompany us. I am rich, and for her love and
care of Leola she shall be well repaid.”

The bride and groom looked at each other, she pitifully humble and
entreating, he angry and resentful, yet on a sudden inclined to make
the best of what seemed to him a bad bargain, so that he muttered,
ungraciously: “You may come home with me, Amanda.”




CHAPTER XVI.

WIDOW GRAY AND THE YOUNG CAVE-HUNTERS.


The tender-hearted Mrs. Gray returned to her cottage after her repulse
at Wheatlands in a very sad state of mind over Chester Olyphant’s
strange disappearance.

In the month that he had boarded with her she had grown to appreciate
him very highly for his true manliness and noble character, and, on his
part, her esteem had been returned by a frank, out-spoken regard.

Toward the last he had made her his confidant, telling her his true
name and position, and explaining why he had wooed Leola under a mask
for the sake of romance, wishing to be loved for himself alone.

“My life has been sad in many ways in spite of great wealth,” he said.
“My parents died in my early childhood, and I was brought up by an
uncle and aunt who are all now dead, so that I have really no near
relatives, having been an only child. But now I shall arrange to marry
Leola very soon, and my beautiful home on the Hudson, Bonnie View, will
have a fitting mistress in my lovely bride. As for you, my dear friend,
in return for all your kindness, I want you to come to us when we are
married and make your home at Bonnie View as Leola’s companion.”

He was disappointed when she declined, gently but decidedly, to accept
his offer, and when he pressed for a reason the good woman said, simply:

“I cannot leave the little cottage where I came a bride, for the
sweetest memories of life cluster around this humble spot. Here my
two sweet children, my boy and girl, were born, and here they and my
husband passed away from me to the Better Land. Here they return in
spirit to brood over my lonely life in love and sympathy, and if I
went away perhaps they could not find me easily, or perhaps they would
not be as well pleased as here, where we were all so happy together.
When my earthly life is ended they will come to soothe my last hours
and bear me company to my heavenly home, so I must wait for them here,
where they watch over me daily, and I am happier so than anywhere else.”

Her words sounded strange to Chester Olyphant in the glow of his love
and youth, loving the world and its gay companionship, but he read on
her placid features a peace and resignation he could not understand,
and ceased to urge her to change her home, only stipulating that he and
Leola should at least have a long visit from her at Bonnie View, to
which she cheerfully assented.

So now, at his strange absence, her heart sank with dread, for last
night at her window the wind in the pine tree had sobbed like ghastly
voices, and she remembered that it had sounded just so before each
calamity that had darkened her life, vaguely foretelling sorrow.

“Something bad has surely happened to the poor young man, for he would
never have gone away like this with no explanation,” she sighed, as she
went, restlessly, about her household duties, with a heart as heavy as
lead.

On the next afternoon she took her knitting out on the front porch
watching, eagerly, up and down the road, for a sight of the absentee,
but all in vain.

Suddenly she heard childish voices, and saw four little lads coming in
at her front gate--little fair-haired, blue-eyed boys, “stairsteps,”
she called them--their ages ranging from eight to twelve.

Widow Gray knew all these neighbor boys very well, and had often
entertained them on her front door-step with apples and ginger-bread
cookies, for they were adventurous little fellows, brothers and
cousins, who often stole away from their homes to explore little caves
roundabout, leaving their doting mammas in wild panics over their
absence.

The good woman knew that another expedition was on foot, for each boy
carried a new tallow candle in hand, and wore his worst clothes, as if
on purpose, while their pretty faces looked up at her, engagingly, as
George, the youngest and boldest, acting as spokesman, asked:

“Mis’ Gray, please, ma’am, may we explore the cave that opens from the
hill in your back lot?”

Smiling cheerily at them, she answered, kindly:

“Bless your little hearts, there ain’t no cave there, children. My
husband always told me ’twas the end of an underground passage from
Wheatlands, where the Hermanns used to hide in Indian raids.”

“We’d like to see it, all the same, ma’am, please,” said the blue-eyed
boy with the little pug nose, in that sweet coaxing voice that always
won its way with every one.

At that she frankly gave consent, since she could see no possible
danger in the adventure, but as she handed them out some currant buns
for lunch she shook her head at them slyly, saying:

“I wonder if your mas know you are out on this raid?”

“Oh, they don’t care!” fibbed Willie, with a jaunty air, and then they
all went around the house, disappearing presently in the hole under the
hill, with their lighted candles, the four dearest and happiest little
chaps in Christendom.

“Bless their little hearts,” she sighed, wiping the quick tears from
her eyes as she thought of her own two darlings at rest in the little
green mounds over in the Presbyterian graveyard, under the grass and
flowers, and as she knit and rocked the summer wind seemed like tender
childish fingers playing with the locks of white hair on her wrinkled
brow.

So time slipped away for an hour or so, as she sat there in the summer
stillness, lulled by the hum of bees and the song of birds, and the low
breeze sighing in the pine trees, and then she started up at the sound
of excited voices coming around the house.

The four cave-hunters were returning helter-skelter, their faces pale,
their eyes like saucers, all shouting at once:

“Oh, Mis’ Gray, we have found a dead man!”

“A dead man!”

“A dead man!”

“If you don’t believe us, come on, and we will show you!”

It was no boyish joke, she could see from their pale, earnest little
faces, so she said:

“Oh, my, how dreadful! Some Indian bones, perhaps, my dears?”

The boys, who had got in a close group together, now began to talk in
loud whispers, one saying. “Oh, tell her!” another, “Oh, don’t,” while
the something unexplainable in their faces made her tremble with a
strange dread.

She said as calmly as she could for the wild beating of her heart:

“Out with it, boys; tell me all you know at once!”

Thereupon Georgie shouted, glibly:

“We went about five miles in the cave with our candles, an’ then we
found”--

She held up a remonstrating hand, saying:

“Not five miles, oh, no; I have often heard that the underground road
isn’t more than a mile.”

“Well, a mile, then,” continued George, unabashed, “an’ then we thought
we heard an nawful grunt, an’ we all jumped so that our candles most
went out, an’ the skin creeped on our bones, ’cause we thought it might
be an Indian ghost, you see, an’ we might get tommy-hawked, an’ our
mammas wouldn’t never know where we was, ’cause we sneaked away,” he
broke down, with a stifled whimper, and nudged the next boy to go on.

Alex took up the story, adding:

“The little boys was scared, but we wasn’t, an’ we marched right on,
an’ d’reckly we come on a dead man--not Indian bones, no, but a white
man with his head all bloody, an’--an’--then we thought we better come
back for you, ’cause you know him.”

With a groan she cried:

“You don’t mean my boarder--Mr. Chester!”

Perhaps the little fellows had already decided to break the news to
her gently, for they nudged each other, and the oldest one said,
sorrowfully:

“It looked like him, but maybe ’tain’t. Please come with us and see!”

“I will come,” she said, “but wait; you said he groaned.”

“Before we got to him it sounded like groans, but when we found him he
was dead.”

“Dead as a door nail!” sobbed little Laurie, awesomely, while the eyes
of the smallest one brimmed over with tears.

It needed no more to make the excited woman follow their guidance back
to the cave, as they persisted in calling it, taking with her some
water and a bottle of wine.

She soon found that the little boys had told her the truth.

The body of Chester Olyphant lay seemingly lifeless on the ground, the
brown curls matted with blood from a wound on the side of the head.

“Oh, who has done this awful murder?” she moaned, as she listened at
his heart for a throb of life.

It seemed to her there was a faint, irregular beat, and she hastened to
apply her restoratives, eliciting a low sound like a gasp or sigh.

“Oh, boys, we’ll have to carry him out to the air,” she exclaimed,
and by their valiant efforts they got him out of the passage just as
twilight darkened the world.




CHAPTER XVII.

“TIME DOES NOT STOP FOR TEARS.”


While the wedding was going on at Wheatlands that evening, Doctor
Barnes, hastily summoned to the cottage, was sewing up a ghastly cut
on Chester Olyphant’s head, and explaining to Widow Gray that it had
barely escaped being a fracture of the skull. Even now he could not
tell what the outcome would be, for, though life still lingered, there
was no return to consciousness.

He made the four little heroes very proud and happy by telling them
that God himself must have prompted their expedition that day in order
to save the young man’s life, and they scampered off home in great
excitement, to spread the news of their wonderful adventure.

Meanwhile the doctor sent for the best nurse in town, and installed her
at the cottage to aid Mrs. Gray in caring for the patient.

But when Leola Mead and her father were driven down to the station
that night, to take the midnight train for New York, no hint of the
truth reached them, and Leola’s heartache over her lover’s falsity was
destined to last long, for from that hour, when she had fallen like
one dead in the arbor, no news of him transpired for many months. Too
proud to confess her heart wound to her father, she never called that
once loved name in his hearing; she only sought refuge from her pain in
change of scene, saying to him eagerly:

“Papa, darling, I have been buried in the country so long that I am
wild to see the world. If you are able to gratify my desires, I prefer
travel to anything else on earth.”

“I live only to gratify your wishes now, my precious daughter,”
answered Alston Mead, eager to atone for having neglected her so long
in his passionate grief over the loss of his lovely young wife.

He had planned to come back and settle down in a quiet home with his
lovely daughter, but he found it no hardship to gratify her desire for
travel, since wandering had become a second nature with him.

So in their leisurely wanderings through the United States, and
afterward abroad, the past became almost like a dream to Leola, who
told herself, bitterly, that doubtless Jessie Stirling and Olyphant
were married long ago, and that she did not care, for she hated him now
as much as she had once loved him.

Alston Mead, in all ignorance of the tragic love story of his fair
daughter, wondered a little that she remained so indifferent to the
suitors she attracted wherever she went, for to him it seemed very
natural for a young girl to fall in love; still he rejoiced that she
did not appear to be susceptible, saying to himself that he could keep
her all the longer to himself.

But all the time Leola was thinking with bitter pique and pain of
Jessie and Chester reconciled and happy, perhaps long ago wedded, his
love affair of that golden summer an almost forgotten episode.

It was bitter, for Leola knew in her heart that she had given the best
and truest love of her life, and that she could never know again the
bliss of those fleeting days, when she had loved and trusted as she
never could again, because her tenderness had been betrayed, her heart
trampled on like a withered flower thrown into the dust.

    “Like the wild hyacinth flower, which on the hills is found,
     Which the passing feet of the triflers forever tear and wound,
     Until the purple blossom is trodden in the ground.”

So strangely and completely had Leola’s life changed that sometimes she
felt as if she had died and come to life again in some new world--a
kaleidoscopic world of change, in which every face and scene was
new--if only, she said to herself, bitterly, she had not brought with
her into this new life the cruel memories of the past, that seemed
always crying aloud to her heart:

    “Look in my face; my name is Might-have-been;
     I am also called No-more, Too-late, Farewell.
     Unto thine ear I hold the dead-sea shell.
     Cast up thy Life’s foam-fretted feet between;
     Unto thine eyes the glass where that is seen
     Which had Life’s form and Love, but by my spell
     Is now a shaken shadow intolerable.”

But “time does not stop for tears,” and the days and months rolled
away and brought round golden June again, so that it was a year since
Leola had ridden out so joyfully on Rex to meet her fate in Chester
Olyphant’s dark blue eyes.

They were in Paris now, and everyone knows how charming Paris is in
June, but somehow Leola’s thoughts turned backward to the West Virginia
hills that she had vowed she never cared to see again--turned back with
a strange homesickness to the wild and picturesque scenes where her
joyous youth had been nurtured, to the old faces, the old pleasures,
and she thought that she should like to get on Rex’s back again for
a breezy canter into the country town, or on to the old Blue Sulphur
Spring for a draught of its cold, clear, sparkling water.

She could close her eyes and see just how it was looking, after the
long, cold winter, in its new summer gown of green, trimmed with
violets, blue and white--that dear old hillside back of the house; and
the orchard would be decked in pink and white, and the birds would be
singing like mad in the branches, and the sky would be blue and sunny,
and the sweet air seem like an elixir of life.

She opened her eyes, and she was in Paris again, and she had in her
hand a memorandum for the shopping she was going to do that week--gowns
and laces and jewels, to deck that wonderful beauty, to set off, like
a splendid frame, the peerless form, the flowerlike face, with its
somber dark eyes and thick waves of ruddy golden hair--the Titian shade
artists raved over.

Her father had had her portrait painted--full length, and all in
white--and all Paris had raved over it when the artist had it on
exhibition those few days before it was boxed to be shipped to America.
She had made many friends, been entertained at the homes of the rich
and great, had refused dazzling offers to the wonder of all, and here
she was, all at once, with a fit of nostalgia for the simple home and
kindly faces that were gone out of her life forever--or so she thought.

She had often thought of the new Mrs. Bennett, wondering if her simple
devotion had ever won her rotund husband’s heart, but she had never
written her a line in her eagerness to forget the grief over those last
days, and put them behind her forever.

Now she thought, tenderly, of the good woman, murmuring:

“How strange it seems I have never heard one word from all I left
behind! Some of them may be dead, some married--Jessie and Chester,
of course, long ago--but there are few I care for save my dear old
governess and Mrs. Gray!”

Putting all these thoughts behind her with a passing wonder why they
had come like ghosts from a dead past to disturb her present peace, she
rang for her maid and got ready for her shopping tour.

An hour later she knew why those subtle memories had overwhelmed her
this morning. It was the influence of telepathy.

Turning over some rare silks at the Arcade, her heart leaped, and her
blood turned cold in her veins at the sound of a familiar voice:

“Leola Mead, am I dreaming, or is it really you? What a charming
surprise! Why, only this morning I was thinking of you, wondering where
you were; and to find you here so soon, it’s like a dream!”

    “My foe undreamed of by my side
       Stood suddenly like fate--
     To those who love, the world is wide,
       But not to those who hate!”

Leola felt a small, gloved hand pressing hers very hard, looked into
bluebell eyes under flaxen waves of hair, and turned cold with dislike
and repulsion, dreading every moment to see over the blonde’s shoulder
her husband’s face, handsome and winning, with the laughing blue eyes
that had smiled her heart away.

With a strong effort she pulled herself together, calling her
passionate pride to her aid. They should not see her wince; she would
show them she had forgotten him. She said, coldly:

“So it is you, Jessie Stirling? How long have you been over?”

“Oh, since early spring shopping for my trousseau, you know,” twittered
Jessie, gayly.

“Then you are not married yet?” Leola cried, eagerly.

“No; but I shall be soon--in late July. Chester was ill so long,
you know,” she twittered on; then, at the startled look in Leola’s
dark eyes, “Oh, I forgot you went away so abruptly that night before
everything happened--the explosion and all! Tell me, haven’t you ever
heard from home? from any of them? Not a word, you say? How very
strange! Leola, is your carriage waiting? Yes? Then I will go for a
drive with you, and tell you everything. We can come back for our
shopping later”--dragging her out.




CHAPTER XVIII.

“IF HATE COULD KILL.”


The two fair young girls stepped into the elegant equipage, and as it
rolled down the glittering boulevard in the glorious sunshine, they
were the cynosure of all eyes.

Jessie Stirling began excitedly:

“And so you have never heard a word from West Virginia since the night
you left so suddenly! Then I have much to tell you. But first, have you
not heard from Chester Olyphant in all this time?”

There was an anxious tone in her voice, but Leola did not heed it, she
answered so spiritedly:

“That is a strange question, Jessie. I have not heard, or ever wished
to hear, from him.”

Jessie’s little tinkling laugh rang out in shallow ripples on the air,
as she exclaimed:

“Still angry! But, poor dear, I do not blame you. It was hard for me to
forgive him for trifling with your tender heart. It was his illness and
suffering that melted my heart.”

Leola listened in blank silence. She would not have asked one word
about Chester Olyphant if Jessie had said that he was dead.

“You care nothing for him now--that is plain to be seen. I am glad you
have gotten so bravely over it,” said Jessie, smiling at the fair,
proud face, with the somber dark eyes gazing straight ahead, though
seeing nothing of the gay streets with throngs of happy people going up
and down as they drove on behind the liveried coachmen.

Then she added:

“You remember, we thought that Chester Olyphant had run away after I
betrayed him? That was wrong.”

She knew that Leola was listening, though she did not answer a word.

“To tell the truth, I may have been a little to blame, Leola, for, in
anger at Chester’s duplicity, I ran to Uncle Hermann with my story,
and he was angry--fearfully angry--at the wrong done to me and to
you. At first he swore he would horse-whip him, but mamma begged him
not to create a public sensation, for she said it was best to let it
blow over. Uncle Hermann did not say yea or nay, and we thought he was
pacified.”

She drew a long breath, and continued:

“Well, you remember how everything happened that night--the wedding,
your father’s return to take you away, and everything? When the
Bennetts were gone, also you and your father, Uncle Hermann was
desperate. We sat up late talking over matters, holding, as it were, a
council of war; for, though your father had mercifully permitted him a
life-time use of Wheatlands, he was so involved in debt that he could
not see a dollar in sight anywhere.”

Leola made no comment, and the speaker went on:

“Uncle Hermann wanted to borrow of mamma, saying he was prosecuting an
experiment that must, if it succeeded, make him fabulously rich, and
revolutionize the whole world. But chemical ingredients were costly,
and he could not go on a week longer without money. He had borrowed,
begged, got all he could, and was desperate for more funds. He said he
could almost steal, if he knew where to lay his hands on the money, for
the sake of his great experiment. He even went on his knees to mamma,
but alas! it was ‘like going to the goat’s house for wool.’ Mamma had
pawned her diamonds long before to keep afloat in society, and was
desperate for means herself. So she could not help him at all, and she
said she would go home next day so as not to bother him any longer in
his trouble. We retired, and at breakfast next morning he said he and
Joslyn would be busy in the laboratory until afternoon; that he had a
few chemicals to work on yet; and that, before we left, we might have
to congratulate him on the success of his experiment.”

Leola began to look more interested. She could not help being sorry for
Wizard Hermann and the failure of his pet hobbies--the ambitions of a
toilsome lifetime.

Jessie Stirling continued:

“Mamma and I went upstairs and packed our trunks, and telephoned to
town for a man to take them down to the station. When they were gone
we walked out to the arbor, waiting for luncheon, and to bid good-bye
to my uncle, when--oh, Leola, with a shock!--suddenly there was the
sound of a terrific explosion from the tower, and we fell back almost
stunned in our seats. It almost seemed as if the world were coming to
an end, for one loud report followed another, and the tower was blown
away, with all of the chimneys. Then suddenly all grew still, and fire
shot out of the windows and doors, caused by an explosion of gasoline
Uncle Hermann had been using in his experiments.”

“Oh, how terrible!” cried Leola, finding voice at last.

“Yes, was it not?” cried Jessie, growing excited at the memory, and
adding: “For not only was the house burned to the ground, but Joslyn,
uncle’s servant, was killed; while as for himself, he fought his way
bravely from the burning building, saving his life at the expense of
all that made it worth living--his eyesight destroyed, his arms burned
off to the elbows.”

“Oh, how horrible! how horrible!” groaned Leola, and her lovely face
went deathly white with the shock of the story.

“I knew you would be shocked,” exclaimed Jessie. “Oh, wasn’t it
fortunate for us that we had gotten out of the house just before! And
saved our trunks, too! The cook was out in the garden getting peas
for dinner, luckily for her! Joslyn was burned in the house; and as
for Uncle Hermann, we thought he must die, too. Indeed, he thought so
himself, for he was in horrible agony, so he sent for a priest--he was
a Catholic, you know--and confessed his sins.”

“And he lived, after all? What became of him? Who took care of the poor
man?” cried Leola, with tears in her eyes, forgetting her own wrongs in
exquisite sympathy.

“Why, the Bennetts took him to their house and cared for him till he
recovered; and he lives there yet, having a man attend to him all the
time. I must say Mrs. Bennett acted beautifully to Uncle Hermann, and
has befriended him all this time in spite of the fact that he hadn’t
been as good as he might to her when she was a lone old maid.”

“It was just like dear Miss Tuttle to return good for evil! She had
a noble heart!” cried Leola. “Dear soul, she was too good for Giles
Bennett!”

“Mamma says she has made a better man of him, and he has become really
fond of the kind soul. You see, mamma made a trip there this spring as
Mrs. Bennett’s guest, while I came over to Europe with a friend,” added
Jessie, who would have bitten her tongue off before she would have
owned to Leola that, having exhausted all their means and failed to
catch a rich husband, she had been forced to become the paid companion
of a rich woman, while her mother eked out an existence “visiting
around.”

She would fool Leola, and keep her and Chester Olyphant apart as long
as she could; but she had an unerring conviction that Fate in the long
run would bring them together.

After a moment’s hesitation she began again:

“I told you that Uncle Hermann confessed his sins the day he thought
he was going to die, but you do not seem curious over it, so I’ll tell
you all about it anyway. Uncle Hermann was so furious over Chester
Olyphant’s trifling with you and me that on the day when you lay
unconscious upstairs he met Chester in the hall and struck him on the
head with a blunt iron instrument, so that he fell like one dead.”

“Dead!” cried Leola, and she shook with emotion.

“Uncle Hermann did not mean to kill him, but he and Joslyn, who
happened along at the moment, both thought he was dead, and, to hide
the crime, they dragged him into the library, took up the flooring, and
dropped him down into an underground passage the family had used in
Indian times. So on his disappearance we naturally concluded he had run
away to avoid my reproaches, don’t you see?”

Leola could only gasp, without speaking, so great was her emotion; and
Jessie, enjoying the sensation she was creating, again took up the
thread of her story:

“So that was what Uncle Hermann had to confess when he thought he was
dying. It was the only really wicked thing he ever did, and he wanted
to get God’s forgiveness before he died; likewise, he wanted Chester
Olyphant to have a Christian burial. Poor Leola, you are faint! All
this has been too much for you.”

Leola faltered, through stiff, white lips:

“No, no; go on, if there is any more to tell.”

Jessie laughed, and resumed:

“I have kept the best for the last. Just as the men were going to hunt
for Chester’s body in the underground passage, Doctor Barnes came along
and told them that some little boys had found him alive in the cave, as
they called it, and they had taken him to Mrs. Gray’s cottage. Well,
to make a long story short, Chester had an awful wound on his head,
and a piece of the skull pressed on the brain, and he never recovered
health or consciousness till he was taken North for an operation that
made him all right again. Mrs. Gray was like a mother to him through it
all, and, next to mamma and me, I suppose he considers her his dearest
friend. Now, as to our love affair, we made it all up some time ago,
and are to be married in July; but I suppose there’s no use asking you
to be my bridesmaid, dear Leola?”

“No,” the girl answered, curtly, adding:

“Jessie, I promised papa to meet him at luncheon, and I shall hardly
get back in time if we do not return now. May I invite you to join us?”

“Not to-day, thank you, Leola, but I will call on you soon, for I am
anxious to see you again, and also to meet your papa. Now if you will
be so kind as to drive by Lady De Vere’s, where I am staying with my
New York friend, I will be very grateful.”

Leola assented, and presently Jessie was set down at the place she
wished, and blew Leola a deceitful kiss from her finger tips as she
went in, muttering to herself as she watched her drive away:

“It was a gratuitous fib I told her about marrying Chester Olyphant,
but I couldn’t resist stabbing her once more to see the light grow dim
in the beautiful eyes that stole his heart from me. All my maneuvering
has failed to win him back, and her turn will soon come, for he is here
in Paris, although she does not know it, and at any minute they may
meet, and everything be explained. Oh, how I wish hate could kill!”




CHAPTER XIX.

LIKE A STAR IN THE NIGHT OF HER DESPAIR.


At the luncheon, which was served in their private dining-room, Leola
could scarcely touch a morsel, she was so eager to tell her father all
that she had heard that morning, barring, of course, the facts about
Chester Olyphant, whose name she vowed should never pass her lips.

But she had scarcely begun her story when he smiled and interrupted:

“It seems quite a coincidence that we have both met people from the
United States this morning--ghosts, as it were, out of your past life.”

“Why, papa?”

“Yes, people from West Virginia, dear--old neighbors of yours--and from
them I have heard already all you were going to tell me.”

“Neighbors of mine! Why, papa, dear, you cannot mean--the Bennetts?”

“Why not, my dear?”

“Why not, indeed? They are rich enough to travel, and I remember now
that my governess used to hanker after foreign travel. So she is here?
You have seen her? Dear soul, I must call at once.”

“She will be here herself by-and-by, so you have only to wait and rest
till she comes.”

“I shall be very impatient,” declared Leola, and then she laughed:

“I suppose Giles Bennett has forgiven me the trick I played him by now?”

“Oh, yes, he said so with very hearty emphasis, and I believed him.
Indeed, the man appeared proud of his wife, who seems to dote on him.
They have been touring the continent for several months, and I met them
in an art gallery this morning. I confess I should hardly have known
them again, they were both so improved since that night, but Mrs.
Bennett recognized my face, and ran joyfully to me to ask about you.
So we talked for an hour, and I invited them to call at our hotel this
afternoon.”

“I can hardly wait for them to come, I am so anxious,” declared the
girl, joyfully. “Are you sure that you have told me everything, papa?”

“Did I mention that Wizard Hermann was dead?”

“No, papa.”

“Well, that is one of the things they told me. It happened quite
suddenly, the cause being heart failure, so after that they decided on
this tour. They have with them also some one else that you know--a Mrs.
Gray, who had a present made her of this tour by a gentleman whom she
had nursed through an illness. How strange you look, Leola! You have
grown pale, and you tremble. Are you ill?”

“Oh, no, papa--perhaps just a little nervous. Go on, papa, have you
anything more to tell?”

“Not just now, my dear daughter--not till you take your luncheon. No? A
drop of this wine, perhaps, to set you up. There, the color is coming
back to your cheeks. Shall I ring to have the things taken away?”

She nodded, and they adjourned to their private parlor.

Then Alston Mead said, gently:

“My dear daughter, I have been hearing surprising things about you
to-day. While I have been wondering at your indifference to men, it
seems you already had a lover.”

Her cheeks paled, then flamed.

“Who has dared betray that unhappy episode of my past? Who has called
his despicable name?” she half-sobbed.

Alston Mead put his arm about her tenderly, like a woman, with a
soothing caress.

“Gently, dear; perhaps he does not deserve your scorn,” he said.

“Then you do not know all the story, papa.”

“Perhaps I know it better than you do, my darling girl, and, strange
to say, Chester Olyphant has been known to me for years. His father
and mother were dear friends of mine, and I knew their boy when he was
a little curly-headed chap in kilts. Naturally, I lost sight of him
afterward in my exile.”

Leola cried, bitterly:

“You lost sight of him, so you did not know he grew up to be an
unworthy scion of a good family--a heartless trifler with women’s
hearts.”

“Grave charges, my daughter!”

“You said that you knew all, dear papa.”

“Yes, I have heard both sides of the story, and you know only one,
Leola.”

“Papa!”

“You know only one,” he repeated.

Leola cried, passionately:

“That was all there was to know! And I am sorry, I am indignant, that
my friends, in mistaken kindness, have betrayed this to you. I--I--was
forgetting it in this new life with you--only it came back bitterly
this morning when Jessie told me--that--she--will be married to him--in
July!”

“And you, Leola, did you hear that news without a pang? Has your heart
grown callous?”

“Spare me, papa!” and the golden head was buried on his breast, while
heaving sobs shook his daughter’s form from head to feet--sobs that
seemed to burst her very heart in twain.

Had her heart grown callous? Oh, no, the pity of it, that she could not
deny she had given her love, irrevocably, to another woman’s lover--to
one unworthy her lightest thought.

    “A honeyed heart for the honeycomb,
     And the humming bee flies home.

    “A heavy heart in the honey-flower,
     And the bee has had his hour.”

Alston Mead let her head rest in his arms until the storm of tears
spent itself naturally; then, as she began to grow calmer, he
exclaimed, angrily:

“Curses on the woman whose malice has culminated in this past year of
sorrow; whose memory must always darken your life, even when the shadow
shall be removed.”

“Removed, papa? Alas, alas!” moaned the girl, who could see in the
future no surcease of sorrow.

She started when her father laughed aloud:

“My dearest, how little faith you had in your lover, to believe all
that little cat told you out of spite!”

“Oh, papa, you do not understand. Indeed, he was her lover. Jessie
spoke the truth. He--only--sought--to amuse himself with me. I--I--know
that it is true, for--I--saw--her--in--his arms!”

He could hardly bear the anguish in the great, dark eyes, the shame,
the self-pity in the quivering voice: he must tell her the truth; he
could not see her suffer any more, poor, proud Leola!

So he answered, quickly:

“You saw her spring to his arms, my dear; and if you had not fainted at
the sight, you would have seen her the next moment repulsed with scorn
by the man who despised the shallow little deceiver.”

A wild cry of incredulous hope shrilled over her lips, and his words
came like a star in the night of her despair.

He continued, tenderly:

“You were tricked and deceived, my poor Leola, by two designing women.
Granted that Chester Olyphant had once been engaged to marry Jessie
Stirling, he had found her out and broken with her before he came to
the mountains to seek you. The girl lied to you, deceived you wickedly,
scheming to separate you and win him back herself. You fainted, and
then Fate stepped in and aided Miss Stirling to keep you deceived for
a whole year, but that was all, for he continued to repulse all her
efforts to get him back. His only fault toward you, darling, was his
hiding his name and position, in the natural, romantic desire to be
loved for himself alone!”




CHAPTER XX.

“ALL THE WORLD AND WE TWO, AND HEAVEN BE OUR STAY.”


Alston Mead had never fully recognized before all the rare beauty of
Leola, for until now it had been shadowed by her secret sorrow--the
thorn that was always piercing her heart.

When the girl looked up at him now her eyes were like stars, sudden
roses had bloomed on her cheeks, and her lips were trembling with
smiles of joy.

“Oh, it is like some sweet dream!” she cried, half fearfully, her white
hands clasped above her wildly throbbing heart.

“It is no dream, my darling; it is a blissful reality,” her father
cried. “Your lover has always been true and noble, and worthy of your
deepest devotion. For months he has been seeking for you everywhere,
and our fortunate rencontre this morning has filled his heart with joy.”

“Oh, papa! you have then seen Ray--Chester, I mean!” she began, in wild
agitation, but he interrupted her, smilingly:

“Call him Ray if you choose, dear--his name is Raphael Chester
Olyphant, you see. Yes, your true lover is in Paris to-day. He crossed
with your friends to seek for you. He will be here by-and-by to see
you, but I promised to tell you everything first, for he does not know
whether you will forgive him for deceiving you under the guise of the
poor artist.”

She cried, radiantly:

“I am glad of it now, for he knows I loved him for himself alone,
and he can never doubt my devotion. Oh, I can scarcely realize my
happiness! It seems like some beautiful dream.”

They were interrupted by the entrance of the Bennetts with Mrs. Gray,
and such happy greetings were never seen before.

Mrs. Bennett, grown matronly and stylish, hugged and kissed her dear
pupil until she was quite out of breath.

Mrs. Gray followed suit when she got a chance, and Giles Bennett
squeezed her little hand until her fingers ached.

Then every one told Leola she was lovelier than ever, and it was easy
for her to return the compliment, for prosperity and happiness had
worked a vast improvement in all three.

A great chattering ensued, all trying to talk at once; for, said Mrs.
Bennett, roguishly:

“We must talk as fast as we can, for some one else is coming presently,
and he warned us that when he appeared he wanted to have the field all
to himself.”

How Leola’s heart beat! how her cheeks burned! She stole a glance at
herself in the long, gilded mirror, wondering if he would think her as
pretty, in her costly silk gown and fine laces, as in the simple cotton
gown of the rustic maiden. The mirror assured her she was even more
charming now, for it is not to be disputed that “fine feathers make
fine birds.”

They told her all over again the story Jessie had related that morning,
adding some that she had preferred not to tell.

The Stirlings had done their best to lure Chester Olyphant back,
but all in vain; and losing their last dollar, the girl had found
employment as companion to a rich old woman going abroad, and the
mother eked out existence visiting around among friends of her better
days. Jessie had sent a last appeal to Chester the day before, and he
had answered it with silent scorn.

Suddenly their talk was interrupted by the entrance of a servant
carrying a card to Mr. Mead.

He glanced at it, and then passed it, with a smile, to his daughter.

The visitors took the hint, and rose precipitately.

“We must all try to meet again to-morrow,” Mrs. Bennett said, as they
all filed out, escorted by Mr. Mead, leaving a clear field for Leola’s
lover.

The happy girl sank back in her chair, feeling as if her heart would
burst with its wild throbbing.

People had died from shock of joy as well as of grief. Could she
survive it?

Her face went pale for a moment--pale as a snowdrift, and she closed
her lovely eyes with a gasp.

There was a quick step in the room, a hurried breath, and some one
knelt at her feet, and caught her two hands in a rapturous clasp that
sent the warm blood bounding through her heart again, crimsoning her
cheeks and lighting her eyes like stars as she opened them to meet
those dark-blue orbs that in the long ago had lured the girlish heart
from her breast, and taught her the most exquisite lesson of life, with
its blended joy and pain.

    “And all the wondrous things of love
     That sing so sweet in song
     Were in the look that met in their eyes,
     And the look was deep and long.”

For a long time that mute yet speaking gaze was enough without words,
but at last Chester rose and drew her to his heart.

“Sweetheart!” he cried, and their lips met after that long year of
silence and sorrow and pain--Jessie Stirling’s year of revenge for all
she had lost by her own unworthiness.

“I could die now!” Leola murmured, faintly, as she clung to his breast.

“No, you must live for me, my bonny bride!” he answered, and presently
they were seated, hand in hand, going over the past.

When she told him of her meeting with Jessie that morning, and of all
she had said, Chester turned coaxingly to his lovely sweetheart.

“So she will have me married in July, willy-nilly!” he said. “Well,
then, why disappoint her plans, my darling? We can be married just as
well as not in July, if you will only consent.”

“Why, July is only two weeks off, Ray!”

“Well, we can make it the last of July, you know, dear--it is so easy
to get a trousseau here in Paris, don’t you know? Say yes, Leola, do,”
he pleaded.

“We must ask papa first, you know,” she said.

“Papa will never stand in the way of our happiness,” he cried, eagerly.

“But, Ray, he will be so lonely.”

“No, dear, for he must come to Bonnie View and live with us, so he will
only gain a son instead of losing a daughter.”

Alston Mead was easily brought to take Chester’s view of the case, the
more easily because he had in his heart a secret he would never confide
to any.

In the last few years an incurable disease of the heart had fastened
upon him, and the most eminent physicians had told him he had not much
longer to live, even if he settled down to quiet days for the rest of
his life.

It had pained him to think of leaving beautiful Leola alone in the
world, heiress to his wealth, perhaps to become the prey of designing
fortune-hunters.

Now all that tangle would be straightened out by her speedy marriage.

He gave consent gladly to all that Chester Olyphant proposed, and he
said to himself:

“Now, whether I die in a few months or live long enough to name my
first grandchild, I shall pass away in peace, knowing that Leola’s
heart can rest safely in her husband’s love.”

So Chester had his way, to the delight of all, and the invitations went
out soon for the wedding at the grand cathedral, for Chester wanted all
the world to see his peerless bride.

Most especially did he wish Jessie Stirling to be present, so in the
invitation that went to her was a note from the happy groom-to-be:

“My Dear Miss Stirling: As you saved me the trouble of setting my
wedding day by naming it for July, Leola and I will insure your
reputation as a prophet by accepting the date.”

When Jessie read that note, with Chester Olyphant’s name signed to
it, she tore it to tatters in her fury, but that did not prevent her
from showing the elegant invitation to her employer, and saying,
hesitatingly:

“I was once engaged to young Olyphant myself, but his love grew cold
when my fortunes failed, and I willingly released him.”

Lady De Vere only smiled, for she had heard from one of Jessie’s former
friends the story of Jessie’s engagement, broken through her own fault
long before she was reduced to poverty, so she only thought: “That girl
is the most consummate liar I ever knew.”

A bitter curiosity carried Jessie to the wedding, but she wore a thick
veil, for she did not want to be recognized. When she wrote to her
mother afterward about it, she confessed that Chester and Leola made
the handsomest bridal couple she ever saw, but that in her humiliation
she had one comfort left--though she could not win him back, she had
succeeded in separating him from his sweetheart for one terrible year,
whose pain and anguish neither could ever forget.


[THE END.]




Transcriber’s Notes:


The Table of Contents was created by the transcriber and placed in the
public domain.

Punctuation has been made consistent.

Variations in spelling and hyphenation were retained as they appear in
the original publication, except that obvious typographical errors have
been corrected.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WOOING OF LEOLA ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg eBook of Brelan des dames, by Robert de
Montesquiou-Fézensac

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Brelan des dames

Author: Robert de Montesquiou-Fézensac

Release Date: December 17, 2022 [eBook #69568]

Language: French

Produced by: Clarity and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
             https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by The Internet Archive/Canadian
             Libraries)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BRELAN DES DAMES ***





  ROBERT DE MONTESQUIOU

  Brelan de Dames


  PARIS
  FONTEMOING et Cie, ÉDITEURS
  4, RUE LE GOFF, 4

  1912




DU MÊME AUTEUR


Volumes de Critique et Recueils d’Essais

    Roseaux Pensants.
    Autels Privilégiés.
    Professionnelles Beautés.
    Altesses Sérénissimes.
    Assemblée de Notables.


Pour paraître prochainement:

    Têtes d’Expression.
    Majeurs et Mineurs.
    Élus et Appelés.




BRELAN DE DAMES


Où en est, actuellement, la Comtesse d’Escarbagnas? Quelle forme
affectent, de nos jours, Philaminthe, Armande et Bélise?

Je ne parle, bien entendu, d’aucune de celles de nos dames qui
pratiquent avec talent, un art pour lequel elles ont de l’aptitude et du
goût.

En effet, si l’on peut reconnaître à Madame d’Escarbagnas, quelque
ressemblance avec Mademoiselle de Scudéri, on ne saurait lui en trouver
avec Madame de La Fayette.

Non, j’examine seulement, ici, quelques-unes de ces fortes
_mamans-prodiges_, qui percent leurs plafonds, avec des lunettes, et nos
oreilles avec leurs tropes, comme avec leurs trompes.

J’ai tout d’abord repris un type de d’Aurevilly, un modèle auquel une
personnelle fréquentation et l’étude approfondie de documents nouveaux,
dont plusieurs inédits, me permettaient d’ajouter des traits
caractéristiques.

De ce modèle, je me suis demandé si l’on pouvait retrouver l’équivalent,
dans notre société contemporaine. Et pour répondre à cette question,
peut-être indiscrète, j’ai ébauché, en regard de celle que l’auteur des
«Bas-Bleus» avait traitée de «Pic de la Mirandole en cornettes»,
quelques gestes de l’une, qui pourrait en figurer le _simulacre_, et de
l’autre, qui peut bien en représenter la _réalité_.

                                   *

                                 *   *

Maintenant, c’est à peine si, venant de citer d’Aurevilly et son ouvrage
magistral, je crois devoir parler de ceux qui, sous prétexte de
galanterie, prétendraient remettre en question le droit du critique à
juger, même vertement, les œuvres de ses confrères féminins.

Voici ma réponse:

Les Dames d’aujourd’hui voudraient-elles aborder, de pair avec les
hommes, toutes les fonctions et toutes les carrières, politiciennes,
médecines, musiciennes, poétesses, épéistes ou chauffeuses, et se voir
aborder, à leur tour, avec le même air enrubanné, pirouettant, poudré,
sucré, destiné à celles qui ne maniaient que l’éventail?

Ce serait leur faire injure.

La femme est devenue la camarade de l’homme; mieux, sa concurrente. Pour
celles qui se bornent à rester des Célimènes, maintenons la bouche en
cœur des siècles passés.

Mais les autres nous apparaissent, à nos côtés, en sarrau d’atelier, en
blouse de travail. Cela, qui ne les rend que plus estimables, quand il
s’agit de l’exercice d’un don réel, permet de leur dire _leurs vérités_.

Les plus sensées se garderont de s’en plaindre, car cela permet aussi de
dire _leurs vertus_.

R. M.




I

MUSÉES POUR RIRE




I

        «Reçu un mot tout gracieux de Saint-Saëns malade, mais content
        du tambourin chargé de fleurs et de la nomenclature de ses
        œuvres.»

        Marquise de BLOCQUEVILLE.


Un homme dont le succès personnel accréditait la parole, en cette
occasion, me disait, un jour: «C’est, selon moi, une erreur de croire
que certaines personnes n’ont pas de veine. Tout le monde a de la veine;
seulement, on sait, ou non, s’en servir.»

En ce qui me concerne, au moins une fois dans ma vie, je n’ai pas su me
servir de la veine. Un mien ami, entre tous avisé, fort au courant de ce
qui pouvait réjouir ma fantaisie et exciter ma verve, à son tour,
m’avait dit, aux environs de 89: «Allez à Dieppe, voir le Musée
Saint-Saëns, je ne vous dis que ça, vous m’en donnerez--ou, plutôt, vous
nous en donnerez des nouvelles, car, étant celui qu’elle peut
impressionner avec le plus de vivacité, vous nous devez le compte rendu
de cette étonnante collection, qui va des «sauterelles d’Algérie» aux
«scories volcaniques» et, de la «Marquise de Présalé» à la «Marquise de
Saint-Paul».

J’entendis le conseil, mais je m’y rendis trop tard. Une fois de plus,
le _deliberando sæpè perit occasio_ me joua un méchant tour: j’entends
celui de laisser, sans que nos regards en aient extrait le spectacle et
déduit la moralité, s’écouler l’espace de jours qui nous en offraient le
champ d’exception. C’en est un, en général, que celui qui nous est
soumis par ce que j’appelle ici les _Musées pour rire_; et, si j’en juge
par ce qu’il nous présente encore, même modifié, celui dont je parle,
dut être, à l’époque où on me le signala, un des plus typiques du genre.

Tel qu’il subsiste, nous allons l’examiner, non sans avoir tout d’abord
spécifié ces modifications et recherché leurs causes. En ce qui regarde
ces dernières, notons bien vite, qu’il suffit, pour les déterminer, de
quelques réflexions caustiques, amenant les organisateurs à s’apercevoir
que le public ne se croit pas toujours forcé d’entrer dans un plan
d’admiration mutuelle.

L’instinct de faire un nid, dont parle le poète, et qui tourmente les
hommes, au cours de leur brève existence, cet instinct se prolonge. Oui,
l’instinct de faire un nid à ce qui s’est groupé autour de nous, durant
notre carrière, vient à plusieurs, à beaucoup, disons-le, à un trop
grand nombre.

Cette forme de l’amour-propre, qui consiste à se survivre dans la
glorification, plus ou moins relative, des objets qui nous ont
appartenu, est trop humaine pour que, si les États et les cités ne
l’enrayent, la menace ne se dresse, contre eux, de voir nombre de
particuliers s’ériger, de leur vivant, dans leur petit hôtel, une sorte
de cénotaphe civil, tenant à la fois du muséum et du mausolée, et dont
la concession à perpétuité, hors-cimetière, est bien écrasante pour se
mesurer avec le peu de durée des objets auxquels on en accorde
l’excessif honneur.

Si la création du Musée constitue, pour un pays, une richesse et une
gloire, la Collection Cernuschi, malgré ce qu’elle a de remarquable,
répond-elle au besoin d’une nation?--Que dire de la Collection
d’Ennery?--Or, je prends à dessein des réunions d’objets d’un intérêt
réel, parce que, s’il y a lieu de condamner même celles-là, le procès
des autres sera fait du coup. Encore une fois, il y a danger à risquer
de transformer une ville, en une sorte de champ de repos, composé de
petites chapelles devenues silencieuses, et dans lesquelles le fumeron
de la vanité n’éclaire que trop, des bibelots que rien n’engageait à
sortir de l’ombre.

Quand le don est fait directement à un Musée, le mal n’est pas moindre,
si la faveur accordée au donateur, de prolonger son souvenir, à l’aide
d’une exposition permanente, apparaît plus importante que celle accordée
au dit Musée, par l’adjonction, à ses richesses, de médiocres objets
d’art et de contestables chefs-d’œuvre.

Pour une Collection La Caze, d’ailleurs bien mal récompensée de ses
beautés, par le traitement qu’on lui inflige, que de legs
inconsidérément acceptés, au Musée du Louvre! Quel rehaut lui apportent,
je vous le demande, les copies à l’aquarelle de la Collection Thiers et
ses piles d’assiettes?

Le Louvre! quelle tentation, pour le snobisme esthétique, d’inscrire un
pareil nom sur son testament, de se constituer un héritier si
honorifique! Il est à craindre que la Comtesse René de Béarn n’y résiste
pas.

Mais il n’est pas besoin que le Louvre lui-même soit en jeu, pour donner
à réfléchir sur le sujet. L’acceptation d’un legs comme telle ou telle
donation connue ne s’impose pas. Les testateurs le savent bien, qui
posent au gouvernement une colle posthume, et se retranchent derrière un
_prendre_ ou _laisser_ immédiat, qui ne manque pas de pouvoir, puisqu’il
enlève l’affaire.

Cette question, comme la question de la Censure, est de celles qui se
représentent continuellement au tribunal des peuples; j’entends l’aléa
d’accepter ou de refuser des dons entre vifs, ou des présents
d’outre-tombe. Il y faut une grande circonspection, laquelle,
d’ordinaire, se voit remplacée par de lourdes gaffes. Il est aujourd’hui
à peu près certain que la Collection Wallace aurait pu, un moment,
appartenir à la France. On sait ce qu’il en est advenu. Il a fallu, à
Georges Hœntschell, de la persévérance, et l’ingénieuse collaboration
d’Henry Lapauze, pour glorifier, comme ils l’ont fait, l’œuvre de
Carriès. Dieu veuille (et Saint Orphée) que la contrepartie naturelle
d’une telle erreur et d’une telle hésitation, ne soit pas d’accueillir
triomphalement quelque pinacothèque de toc!

                                   *

                                 *   *

_Paulŏ minora canamus._ C’est par là que nous avions commencé, là que
nous voulions en revenir; mais il nous fallait, pour donner certaine
force à notre démonstration, l’appuyer sur des exemples plus importants,
lui donner de plus solides bases.

Convenir avec nous de ces deux dangers: encombrer le Louvre de dons
insuffisants et combler Paris de collectionnettes; puis ajouter que la
province doit se montrer bon enfant et tout heureuse d’accepter le
déchet de ce qui messied à la Capitale, ce serait ne se montrer qu’à
demi clairvoyant et à moitié juste. La dénomination de _Musée_ contient
et représente une dignité qui n’est ni parisienne ni provinciale, et ne
devrait jamais être conciliable avec de petits panthéons individuels ou
du bric-à-brac sans valeur.

Tels n’en sont pas moins, je le répète, les deux dangers qui menacent le
Musée de province.

Or, il ne faut pas oublier que le petit Musée de Montauban contient la
collection des dessins d’Ingres, et le Musée de Nantes, son portrait de
Madame de Senones, pour ne citer que ces deux exemples. Ils suffisent à
prouver que rien de grand n’est étranger aux galeries provinciales, et
que, s’il leur convient de rester peu remplies, ou de demeurer désertes,
même ce dernier état serait préférable à la faute de les faire servir à
telles ou telles glorifications individuelles, par des accumulations de
colifichets ou de bimbeloterie.

Pour ce qui est du premier cas, à savoir ce que j’appelle le petit
panthéon individuel, c’est lui que nous devons examiner, parce que c’est
lui qu’il faut rendre responsable de l’autre, c’est-à-dire: l’apport du
bric-à-brac sans valeur.

Qu’est-ce qui pousse le particulier à cet envahissement du territoire
public?

Ce serait évidemment mal s’exprimer que de parler d’infatuation, à
propos d’un véritable mérite. Néanmoins, traitant de Monsieur Sargent,
je me souviens d’avoir écrit: «Quand certains hommes sont devenus tout à
fait, je ne dis pas de grands hommes (de ceux-là l’espèce est encore
rare), mais de grands bonshommes et, si vous préférez, de gros bonnets,
il semble qu’on ne puisse plus, sous peine d’impiété, hasarder la plus
faible objection sur leurs grosses méprises. C’est leur rendre un très
mauvais service. Il en résulte, pour eux, ce sentiment d’infaillibilité
sous-entendue, toujours dangereux pour celui qui s’y abandonne.»

C’est, on peut l’affirmer, il me semble, d’un sentiment équivalent à
celui-là, que peut résulter, du fait même de quelqu’un de valable, la
création du petit panthéon individuel. Il se peut que le grand bonhomme
et, si vous voulez même, le grand homme vive dans une atmosphère
d’adulation qui lui fasse perdre de vue que ses mérites n’ont pas de
raison de rendre chères, fût-ce à ceux qui les apprécient, telles
circonstances de son existence, ou des membres de sa famille.

On peut admirer la _Danse Macabre_ et les _Mélodies Persanes_, sans que,
pour cela, les souvenirs de «la Grand’Tante Masson» deviennent un objet
de culte.

Le rédacteur du catalogue nous apprend que le Musée Saint-Saëns a été
créé pour servir de cadre aux œuvres de Madame Saint-Saëns mère, qui
était «la meilleure élève de Redouté».

Or, comme peu d’instants de réflexion suffisent à nous persuader qu’un
Musée, composé d’œuvres de Redouté lui-même, n’offrirait qu’un intérêt
restreint, je vous laisse à tirer la conclusion, en ce qui concerne les
œuvres de sa meilleure élève.

Il est facile de démontrer la touchante erreur, qui fait qu’un artiste
réputé veut faire participer à sa renommée des mémoires qui lui sont
chères. Cependant, non seulement il n’est pas prouvé que son public ait
le devoir de le suivre dans cette voie; mais on peut même affirmer qu’il
est en droit de l’abandonner sur ce point.

Le «ayant appartenu» ne saurait être suffisant pour conférer du prestige
à des objets qui n’en sont pas doués par eux-mêmes, que si le feu
titulaire, fût-il, entre tous, respectable, possédait d’autre titre que
celui de tenir de près à un grand artiste, lequel tire de son cœur
l’admiration à lui inspirée par les œuvres du défunt.

Entre autres objets de ce genre, je me vante de posséder, la cage de
Michelet, la canne de Musset, les lunettes de Becque. Mais ces noms en
disent assez pour doter de rayonnement les pauvres choses qui les
accompagnent.

Il est possible, sans manquer de respect à la gloire de Monsieur
Saint-Saëns, et sans risquer de méconnaître son noble sentiment filial,
qu’on puisse ne pas juger de même à l’égard de ce qui nous est donné
pour la raison d’être de son Musée. Et, puisque le reste n’est que pour
servir d’encadrement, examinons un peu ce cadre.

Et, tout d’abord, je dénonce un scandale; l’indigne placement infligé,
par le Musée de Dieppe, à l’œuvre charmante de Madame Madeleine Lemaire:
le _Char des Fées_. Ce tableau (le catalogue nous l’indique) fait partie
du Musée Saint-Saëns. Alors pourquoi n’y figure-t-il point? Ce n’est pas
assez le louer que de dire qu’il en serait le plus bel ornement. Et si
Monsieur Saint-Saëns a jugé bon de spolier ses salles, d’un tel appoint,
pour en faire bénéficier le Musée proprement dit, comment n’a-t-il pas
mis comme condition à sa générosité, qu’on la reconnaîtrait d’un
meilleur remerciement que de perdre dans les frises, l’œuvre qui en
faisait l’objet?

Ce n’est pas, certes, Monsieur Blanche qui voudrait y contredire, lui
dont la grande artiste occupe l’atelier, toujours au dire du catalogue.

Quel que soit donc l’exceptionnel intérêt de l’œuvre exposée, au même
Musée de Dieppe, par ce peintre, nous ne doutons pas qu’il n’ait à cœur
d’en céder galamment la place à l’étincelant _Char des Fées_. Et
cependant, jamais le jeune Maître ne s’est montré plus en possession de
ses moyens, ni mieux inspiré que dans la réalisation du poignant
chef-d’œuvre dont il a fait don à la ville maritime.

Ce tableau, nul de ceux qui l’ont vu, autant dire admiré, n’en aura
perdu le souvenir. C’est _l’enfant se préparant à subir l’opération de
la transfusion du sang_. Bien que coiffée de fourrure, et son pauvre
petit corps roulé dans un amas de pelleterie, au point d’en paraître
inexistant, la diaphane fillette anémiée grelotte et, sans doute, n’est
pas non plus sans trembler, à l’idée de la minute redoutable. Néanmoins,
une flamme est dans ses yeux, on sent qu’elle aura du courage et qu’un
jour, bientôt peut-être (Dieu le veuille!) nous verrons le rose affluer
à ses joues pâlottes et colorer ses menottes de cire.

Non seulement cette page est une des plus expressives de l’œuvre si
_personnelle_ de cet artiste, mais c’est une des plus marquantes de
l’École Française ancienne et moderne, mieux encore un saisissant
spécimen de l’histoire de l’humanité. Sa place est, moins dans un Musée
frivole, que dans une clinique de hautes études, entre une reproduction
du _Médecin aux Urines_ et un fac-simile de la _Leçon du Professeur
Tulp_.

Revenons au Musée Saint-Saëns et, cette fois, pour ne plus le quitter,
avant d’en avoir fait le tour. Au moins un petit tour, car d’autres
tournées nous sollicitent; un tout petit tour.

                                   *

                                 *   *

Voici d’abord, deux portraits de Monsieur Saint-Saëns, qui, pour être
dus à des artistes peu connus de nous, n’en offrent pas moins d’intérêt.
Qu’on en juge par leur description dieppoise.

Le premier est porté au numéro 1807 du catalogue, qui nous le présente
sous cette forme: «C. Saint-Saëns, de profil, couronné et tenant une
lyre, chevauche un aigle planant dans les nuages.» Signé: «A
Saint-Saëns, J. Nucci, contre-basse, son admirateur.»--L’autre, inscrit
au numéro 1809, nous apparaît un peu moins ambitieux, mais non moins
pittoresque: «Camille Saint-Saëns, debout sur une masse de volumes
empilés, œuvres du Maître, avec cette inscription: «Saint-Saëns, célèbre
musicien.» Signé à gauche: «J. Parera», avec cette dédicace: «Au grand
artiste, le petit Parera, Barcelone».

Au reste, et soit dit en passant, le Maître nous paraît avoir le don de
faire jaillir, de ses admirateurs, les facultés les plus inattendues.
C’est, en effet, à peine si nous en croyons nos yeux, quand nous lisons,
au numéro 1814, «Henri Roujon, Tête de Camille Saint-Saëns, de face.
Dessin au crayon, croquis.» Ce mot _croquis_ a beau être modeste, n’en
voilà pas moins Monsieur Roujon passé _décorateur_. Nous ne l’attendions
pas dans ce nouveau rôle. Le «cesse de vaincre...» s’impose.

La Marquise de Saint-Paul emboîte le pas. Celle-là aussi sort de son
domaine, celui des bruits. Lisez plutôt, à la suite de son nom, au
numéro 1815: «Fleurs, anémones, _et sa tête photographiée_». La
rédaction, qui surprend un peu d’abord, s’explique ensuite. _Fleurs_,
qui ferait pléonasme avec anémones, s’applique pareillement à la tête de
la Marquise. Et, alors, cela va de soi.

Au numéro 1990, dans les portraits divers, nous lisons ensuite ces mots
mystérieux: «Profil d’une tête de nègre, avec reproduction
d’attestations.» Après tout, c’est peut-être le nègre de Mac-Mahon,
flanqué de la phrase célèbre.--Au 1992, la Reine de Roumanie a écrit une
de ses phrases simplettes: «Devant le buisson en flammes, on ôte ses
souliers et l’on donne son âme.»--Pour Loti, elle s’est fait
représenter, offrant théâtralement, à une image de Madone, un diadème de
carton et un instrument de même matière, avec, au-dessous, toujours en
toute simplicité: «Ma Couronne et ma Lyre aux pieds de la Mater
Dolorosa.»--Au 2015, nous rencontrons Mademoiselle Harding, dans le rôle
de Phryné, et respirant une rose. Cette photographie, comme on le voit,
n’a pas été prise le jour de la première.

Au 2084, dans les papiers de famille, voici des «Lettres de Monsieur
Grisard du Sauget, cousin de Madame Masson, dans lesquelles il est
question de deux tableaux, en sa possession, qu’il croyait de Fra
Angelico et qui n’étaient que des copies d’après Van Loo.»--La distance
est, en effet, assez grande pour mériter d’être mentionnée.--Au numéro
2090, c’est de Madame Masson, née Charlotte Gayard, grand’tante de
Saint-Saëns, «une poésie intitulée: _A mon esprit_ (son mari, Monsieur
Masson, libraire, à Paris).»--Au numéro 2091, dans une lettre de Madame
Saint-Saëns mère, il est fait mention de Camille «malade, pour avoir
trop grandi». La scène se passe en 1848. Empressons-nous d’ajouter que,
depuis, il ne cesse de grandir, mais, grâce à Dieu, se porte comme le
Pont-Neuf.--Au numéro 2092, autre lettre de Madame Saint-Saëns à son
fils «après lequel elle est en colère».--Viennent ensuite des lettres du
Maître lui-même. Elles sont infiniment variées de ton. Qu’on en juge,
puisqu’elles traitent successivement «d’études comparées sur le chant
des obus», de l’éruption du Vésuve, de la gentillesse des ours bernois
et se terminent sur un «mot sans date et sans adresse, à un intime dont
il réclame la présence, en lui apprenant que son petit André s’est tué
en tombant par la fenêtre».

Parmi les nombreuses lettres adressées à Monsieur Saint-Saëns, il y en a
huit de la Marquise de Saint-Paul. Gageons qu’il pourrait bien s’en
trouver une pour taper le Maître, d’une petite audition Rue Nitot, en
l’honneur de la Sainte Eugénie.

Quant aux huit lettres de la Vicomtesse de Trédern, je ne serais pas
surpris, au contraire, qu’elles aient, toutes les huit, pour but,
d’offrir son concours.

Au 2248, j’entends parler d’une grande scène lyrique intitulée: _La
Marquise de Présalé_; et je me demande s’il ne s’agirait pas d’une
préfigure ou, si vous le préférez, d’une post-figure de la même Marquise
Versaillaise.--Au 2165, saluons, en passant, du Docteur Don Grégorio, un
éloge des Canaries et de Camille Saint-Saëns.--Au 2283 _et passim_,
notons des tambourins, peinturlurés et honorifiques, offerts par la
Marquise de Blocqueville, cadeaux significatifs qui nous permettront de
faire valoir, tout à l’heure, un éloquent rapprochement.--Au 2319 nous
enregistrons la présence d’un «_casse-croûte_ en bois orné». Cette
expression ne nous étant pas très familière, nous en cherchons le sens
dans notre dictionnaire, qui nous apprend, sans ménagements, qu’elle
signifie: «instrument qui sert à broyer la croûte pour ceux qui n’ont
plus de dents». On comprend, dans cette circonstance, que le catalogue
n’indique pas _de qui_ provient ce bibelot, moins heureux, par suite, et
moins illustre que ce presse-papier, orné d’un cheval au galop, dont on
nous apprend qu’il fut, lui, la propriété de Monsieur Ambroise Thomas.

_Casse-croûte_ et _presse-papier_, que vos destins sont divers!

                                   *

                                 *   *

A notre regret, nous devons borner notre glane dans le Musée
Saint-Saëns.

Donc, après avoir noté nombre de familières dédicaces «à l’ami Camille»
et cette inscription plus altière de _Divus Camillus_, il ne nous reste
plus qu’à recueillir les échos du Dimanche 18 juillet 1897, mémorable
jour de l’inauguration du Musée Saint-Saëns. Le menu du banquet nous est
parvenu. Nous savons qu’il eut pour _prélude_ un «cantaloup glacé» et
pour _finale_, un «Gâteau Camille Saint-Saëns». Là, nos connaissances
gastronomiques sont en défaut. Nous avouons ignorer cette pâtisserie, ne
pas savoir si elle est feuilletée ou glacée, en forme de tarte ou de
tourte, de chausson ou de pièce montée. Cependant, un esprit de
déduction nous porte à croire que ce pourrait bien être tout simplement
(n’êtes-vous pas de notre avis?) quelque chose comme un Saint-Honoré de
la Musique.

Ce qui est certain c’est que l’entremets fut mangé aux sons de la
cantate ci-jointe, due à la lyre d’«un vieil ami», Monsieur Alfred
Tranchant, que certainement Rivarol, en récompense, aurait placé dans
son _Petit Almanach des Grands Hommes_, à côté de Minar de la
Mistringue.


A CAMILLE SAINT-SAËNS

               Hosanna!... Hosanna!...
            Il est dans nos murs... il est là,
               Dans la cité Dieppoise,
            L’Auteur de _Samson et Dalila_;
               D’une façon digne, courtoise,
    Que chacun donc l’accueille et l’acclame bien haut,
            L’Auteur d’_Henri VIII_ et d’_Ascanio_!
              Salut à sa verve gauloise
              A son génie, en l’art
              Des Gounod, des Mozart!

    Et s’il n’a pas encor parmi nous sa statue,
                    Son monument,
            C’est que l’heure n’est pas venue,
                    Heureusement.

    Honneur, honneur à Dieppe! Honneur à sa Mairie
    Qui vient, au nom de tous les cœurs reconnaissants,
    De nommer la place où se tient la Comédie:
          La place Camille Saint-Saëns.

Et maintenant, muni de la lampe de porion, trouvée «auprès d’un cadavre»
dans le puits numéro 2, à Billy-Montigny, faisons une dernière station
au Musée d’Histoire Naturelle qui, lui aussi, porte des traces de la
générosité de Monsieur Saint-Saëns. Admirons le «Macrocrona» dont il a
doté ces vitrines, en même temps que de «sauterelles d’Algérie», de
«crânes de cochon et de porc-épic», de «coquilles à l’état fossile,
recueillies dans les déjections boueuses du volcan éteint, nommé Mont de
Galdar, aux Grandes Canaries».

Puis, éloignons-nous, éblouis, charmés, un peu étonnés, un brin
frissonnants, à travers les «crânes mérovingiens», les «bras décharnés»,
les «fœtus humains», les «calculs de vessie», les bocaux de ténias, les
cocons, les coucous, les molaires d’éléphants, les mâchoires de
marsouins, les restes de cachalots; les araignées de mer, les
bécasseaux, les huîtriers, les oies-cravants, les buses pattues, les
outardes barbues, les stercoraires parasites, les guillemots à capuchon
et les pingouins en plumage de noce!




II

        «L’une de ces Romaines, noblement drapée, tient une oie, qu’elle
        semble vouloir cacher.»

        Catalogue de la Salle d’Eckmühl.


Et cependant, qu’est-ce que nous offre à voir, dans le genre, le Musée
Saint-Saëns, à côté de ce qui nous est présenté par le Musée d’Auxerre?

Le moment est venu de mettre en valeur le rapprochement dont je parlais
plus haut. J’ai dit que la Marquise de Blocqueville avait offert au
grand musicien nombre de tambours de basque. Mais elle en avait gardé
pour elle. C’est de ceux-là que je veux tambouriner, pour accompagner
une cantate en son honneur.

Au demeurant et, d’une part, cette cantate, il y a longtemps que
j’aspire à l’entonner; d’autre part, l’étendue, sinon la grandeur du
sujet me fait hésiter. Sur le point d’écrire les quelques notes que j’ai
consacrées à la Province, dans les _Altesses Sérénissimes_, je me
sentais effrayé par la majesté d’un sujet épuisé par Balzac. Un sujet
effleuré par d’Aurevilly ne me semble pas moins redoutable. C’est le
cas. On connaît le brillant passage que l’auteur des _Diaboliques_ a
consacré à la Marquise dans un chapitre de ses _Bas-Bleus_. Il est loin,
toutefois, d’avoir épuisé la matière; et comme elle nous apparaît sous
un autre aspect, et que nous comptons l’aborder à un autre point de vue,
nous allons contenter notre envie.

Madame de Blocqueville était, on le sait, la seconde fille du Maréchal
Davoust. Elle professait un culte pour son père. La chose n’a rien que
de noble et de naturel. Néanmoins, la Dame était si avantageuse que je
me permets de démêler un peu de snobisme filial, dans ce grand amour.
Chaque fois qu’elle en trouve le joint, elle se nomme elle-même _la
Fille du Lion_, et cette désignation léonine n’est évidemment pas sans
chatouiller agréablement la crinière d’une lionne de cette importance.

Je crois bien qu’elle fut belle. Mal mariée, de bonne heure, à un homme
sans naissance (et, probablement sans mérite, d’aucun genre, car, nulle
part, il n’en est jamais soufflé mot, au cours d’un océan de
bavardages)[1], Louise d’Eckmühl, se mit à voyager et à philosopher,
notamment à travers l’Italie. De là au bas-bleuisme, il n’y avait pas
loin; l’espace fut vite franchi, et, bien qu’elle s’en défende, quand on
l’induit à en rougir, elle représenta un type transcendant de cette
espèce en train de se perdre.

  [1] J’ai dû en rabattre sur cette appréciation; l’homme était au moins
    bel homme, si j’en juge par un portrait de lui que le hasard me met
    sous les yeux, chez un antiquaire de province.

En ce temps-là, nos Dames ne s’étaient pas toutes mises à pondre sur
papier, comme elles ont fait depuis; or, c’est de cette universalité que
meurt le bas-bleuisme qui, précisément, figurait l’exception, parfois du
don, et souvent de la culture, lesquels faisaient se détacher nettement
un type de Philaminthe, sur le monotone fond ourdi par le peuple des
épouses selon le vœu de Chrysale. Aujourd’hui les conjointes ne savent
plus mettre les rabats dans le _Plutarque_, mais elles ne savent pas
davantage le lire. Cependant, elles ont appris à irriguer d’encre leur
foyer, le monde et la ville; et si leur production ne va pas plus loin,
c’est que la tubulure fait défaut, qui ne demande qu’à serpenter par
l’univers.

Madame de Blocqueville n’a pas connu de ces mesquines rivalités; elle
fut la Dinah Piedefer de l’Épopée. Elle pondit. Que dis-je? Elle fit
mieux, ou pis. La Nature, qui lui avait refusé la maternité naturelle,
lui permit de procréer de petits ours, et même de gros, qu’elle lécha
consciencieusement, et qui lui parurent «mignons, beaux, jolis et bien
faits sur tous leurs compagnons», illusion où l’entretint la complicité
d’une cour amicale, une courette.

Il serait trop long d’examiner, ici, le plus ou moins de valeur de ces
œuvres transcendantes, pleurnicheuses et philosophâtres, qui me
paraissent tenir de ce qui fut, un instant, le goût du jour, au temps de
la jeunesse de l’auteur, le Vicomte d’Arlincourt et Monsieur de Custine.

Certes, l’Auteuresse avait lu Joseph de Maistre. D’Aurevilly le dit
excellemment: «Madame de Blocqueville a fourré du jasmin dans les
_Soirées de Saint-Pétersbourg_.» Mais elle avait aussi lu _Lélia_; elle
déguise en Stenio et en Trenmor, des messieurs de sa coterie; et pour
son compte, elle se drape en Lélia, mais de toute l’infinie variété de
ces peignoirs, que l’Auteur des _Diaboliques_ nous énumère. Cette Lélia
guerrière s’appelle Eltha-Lucifera, elle est duchesse, et tout du long
des quatre tomes de la _Villa des Jasmins_, le grand œuvre, elle change
de toilettes, et _rase_. Car c’est là le vrai nom de ce que fait Madame
de Blocqueville. Si d’Aurevilly n’emploie pas ce terme c’est, je crois,
qu’il n’était pas d’un usage courant, à l’époque de son article. Mais
quand il accuse la Dame, de _blaguer_, tout le temps, je ne doute pas
que ce ne soit _raser_ qu’il ait voulu dire.

Si le cours de notre petit Essai nous y induit, nous parlerons de la
_Villa des Jasmins_; mais ce n’est pas ce qui nous attire. Ce que nous
voulons étudier c’est le type falot de la grosse Madame qui, toute une
longue existence, peut bien se prendre au sérieux, dans de telles
proportions, sur de si minces données; qui bâtit son immortalité, et
celle de tout ce qui l’entoure, sur les assises que nous allons
examiner, et meurt sans s’être réveillée de l’illusion d’un rêve, à la
fois puéril et grandiose, comique et douloureux, qui a fait jaboter sa
vie.

Ce sera donc seulement au Musée d’Auxerre, aux objets qu’il contient, à
son catalogue qui les décrit, et tout spécialement à certaine collection
d’agendas, que nous demanderons de nous enseigner, de nous renseigner,
de nous réjouir.

                                   *

                                 *   *

La Marquise est morte en 1890, si je ne me trompe; mais, depuis bien une
dizaine d’années, au moins, plus que préoccupée d’assurer le destin de
ce qu’elle croyait être ses trésors, elle avait résolu de les léguer à
la Ville d’Auxerre (lieu de naissance de son père); à cet effet, elle
s’était assuré le consentement des autorités, avait fait disposer une
salle du Musée, et commencé d’envoyer ce qu’elle lui destinait.

Je ne sais si l’inauguration en fut faite, de son vivant; je ne le crois
pas. En tout cas, elle-même n’y est jamais venue. Elle se contenta d’en
dresser le catalogue, mais ce, avec une assiduité, une anxiété, dont
témoignent les carnets vibrants.

Ce défaut de l’œil du maître se fait sentir dans l’ordre, il semble
assez incohérent, de la bibliothèque. Le libraire Quantin avait accepté
le titre de conservateur de ce singulier Musée; mais, je suppose, par
condescendance, et ne dut pas y prendre beaucoup d’intérêt. Le
Conservateur actuel est âgé et semble plus jaloux de ses droits, plus
inquiet des indiscrétions, que désireux d’aider les recherches.

Et cependant le devoir de sa charge n’est pas douteux: accomplir la
volonté de la défunte. Or, cette volonté n’est, elle-même, pas douteuse,
elle se formule au cours des petits cahiers, qui se représentent
l’intérêt de leur découverte pour «les chercheurs de l’avenir».

Il ne s’agit donc pas d’en marchander la lecture à ceux qu’elle peut
intéresser. L’accès hebdomadaire, un nombre d’heures fort restreint,
rend déjà la chose assez difficile. Un jour viendra, sans doute, où
cette charge sera confiée à un homme jeune et mieux en accord avec sa
mission, qui sera de débrouiller ce fatras, afin de faciliter la besogne
aux «chercheurs» évoqués et invoqués par la donataire.

Chacun des agendas contient une année. Le catalogue fut imprimé en 1882.
Le griffonnage ayant continué jusqu’en 1889, cela fait donc sept années
à y ajouter. Si je démêle bien, dans le dit catalogue les indications
ayant trait à ces cahiers, qu’il ne faut pas confondre avec d’autres
gribouillages, l’interminable série commence en 1847 (pour ne finir, je
l’ai dit, que l’an 1889). Ce qui devrait porter à quarante-deux le
nombre des cahiers. Cependant, à en croire le même index, deux années
manqueraient, 78 et 79. Cela me semble peu probable. Elles se
retrouveront. Les chercheurs peuvent donc compter sur quarante-deux
années de radotage, comme les fonds de bibliothèque en offrent peu
d’exemples.

Celui-ci donne à réfléchir pour les mères qui mettent imprudemment entre
les mains de leurs fillettes, des volumes tels que le _Journal de
Marguerite_ de Mademoiselle Monniot, pour lequel je voyais, quand
j’étais enfant, se passionner mes petites aînées. C’est un grand danger
de laisser croire, à une jeune demoiselle, qu’elle peut déposer de
l’écriture au seuil et au bas de chacun des jours de l’année. La
terrible fournée des Eugénie de Guérin de raccroc, que nous subissons,
pourrait bien ne pas avoir d’autre origine. On commence par barbouiller
le quantième, la correction des épreuves n’est pas loin. Adieu la
broderie qui était si belle! Le premier _vers_ se fait sans qu’on y
pense!

                                   *

                                 *   *

Quant à l’ensemble du dit, du soi-disant Musée, il est à peu près aussi
bien aménagé que le permettent les pauvres choses qui le constituent.

C’est, au second étage de l’édifice, une salle un peu basse, pour sa
longueur (une dizaine de mètres environ) éclairée, si je ne me trompe,
par sept grandes fenêtres voilées de stores, à l’exception de celle du
fond, pourvue d’un vilain vitrail, qui _ornait_ la salle à manger de la
patronne, au Quai Malaquais. Sur la frise du plafond peint, s’inscrivent
circulairement les noms des batailles de Davoust, dont le buste et la
statue figurent dans la pièce, mais avec assez peu de précision pour que
l’on se demande, en y pénétrant, si elle est consacrée à l’éloge du
guerrier, ou à la gloire du Cap Frehel et de son phare, dont le modèle,
bien qu’en miniature, est encore assez grand pour prendre toute
l’attention, et jeter bas le reste du décor.

Je suis loin de mettre en doute les sentiments filiaux professés par la
défunte; mais il ne me semble pas davantage douteux qu’elle en ait joué
pour placer son ours et solenniser toute sa défroque.

Afin de pouvoir passer celle-ci en revue avec la familiarité qui
convient, mettons à part les insignes du guerrier, et quelques-uns de
ses objets de souvenir, lesquels seraient bien mieux à leur place au
Musée de l’Armée. On peut aussi faire exception pour une ou deux jolies
miniatures de famille.

Cependant, un objet domine tout cela, un chef-d’œuvre, peut-être le
chef-d’œuvre de Ricard, un admirable portrait de la Marquise.

Je ne pense pas que celle-ci, qui n’avait aucun goût, l’ait apprécié;
elle appelle à son aide pour le trouver et prouver beau. Et ce grand
renfort, excusez du peu, n’est rien moins que le grand Dominique. Nous
lisons, en effet, à la page 29 du _Catalogue de la Salle d’Eckmühl_:
«Mon portrait de grandeur naturelle, avec les mains, peint par Gustave
Ricard. Le costume,--sauf le léger voile noir voulu par Ricard, en
souvenir de la Joconde,--rappelle le costume du beau portrait de la
Duchesse de Buckingham, par Van Dyck, aujourd’hui au Musée d’Amsterdam.
Robe de velours noir, guipures blanches et nœuds bleus. Monsieur Ingres
nous a dit, un jour, «que celui qui avait fait ce portrait était
certainement _un peintre_.»

Or, par l’effet d’une de ces surprises de destinées, que les
spiritualistes peuvent considérer comme une forme d’épreuves des âmes,
dans l’Au Delà, ce magnifique portrait, grâce au despotisme de la
Marquise, devenue dans la mort sa propre geôlière et sa tourmenteuse
implacable, est voué à ne jamais sortir du cabinet Auxerrois, auquel le
condamne son modèle.

L’Exposition de Ricard, jamais accomplie depuis sa mort, et d’autant
plus impatiemment attendue, sera faite, on le devine, avec quel noble
éclat. Mais l’exercice maladroit d’une volonté enfantine et terriblement
étroite, en exclura certainement l’une des meilleures œuvres du peintre.

Ceci dit, essayons de donner une idée de ce qui constitue l’intérêt de
cette surprenante collection et du catalogue qui la décrit avec tant
d’amour. Un intérêt évidemment un peu différent de celui que lui
souhaitait la donatrice. Mais ces maldonnes sont assez fréquentes:

«_Un grand comique_ nous est né!» me disait, un jour, une femme
d’esprit, parlant d’une dame qui venait de publier un roman, lequel lui
devait, à ses yeux, faire prendre place au nombre des _grands lyriques_.

On prend la place qu’on peut.

C’est le cas de la Marquise de Blocqueville. Nombre de fois, au cours de
ses incontinents agendas, elle nous entretient de ce factum qu’elle
appelle: _ce terrible catalogue qui tourmente ma vie_. Il la fait
s’écrier avec angoisse, à l’occasion d’une maladie qui la met en danger,
avant la conclusion de ce document: pas encore, mon Dieu, _seulement le
catalogue_!--Enfin, l’_œuvre_ est finie; elle l’envoie à l’impression
(jour mémorable!) le 27 février 1882, après en avoir pris quatre copies.

Et, quand il est sorti des presses, un correspondant le proclame:
«unique en son genre».

C’est que la Marquise fut, on peut le dire, victime des correspondants
et des visiteurs familiers, sinon intimes. La lecture des agendas le
prouve plus que surabondamment.

Des deux parts, le malentendu était inévitable. Elle était sédentaire.
Comme un homme d’esprit que nous avons cité, elle aurait pu dire: «J’ai
le besoin du repos et le goût du mouvement.» Ou, plutôt, ce n’est pas
tout à fait cela. Ce qu’elle aurait dû formuler, pour dire le vrai,
c’est: «J’ai le besoin du bruit et le goût du repos.» Il fallut donner
satisfaction à cette double tendance. Pour cela, elle fit toilette, et
attendit. On vint. Elle joua l’aimable, rien que pour ne pas être seule
et, surtout, ceci est plus spécieux, pour pouvoir se plaindre d’être
débordée.

Quant à ses invités, c’était tentant, pour des gens qui ont l’amour des
visites, cette belle dame toujours costumée, sans cesse assise, presque
trônante, qu’on savait trouver chez elle, indéfiniment, loquace et
diserte. On était venu, on revint. On y prit goût, elle aussi; et, d’un
côté, comme de l’autre, on tint cela pour de l’amitié. Peut-être y en
eut-il; mais, je le crains, pas beaucoup; en tout cas, pas de bien
forte. Rien que de cette égoïste habitude, pour des désœuvrés, de monter
un étage et de se répandre. Et comme il fallait bien payer d’un écot,
l’hospitalité souriante et ouverte, on gratta la Dame où elle se
démangeait, à savoir en son amour-propre. A ce jeu elle devint
insatiable. Tout lui était bon qui la flattait. Notez que je ne dis pas:
qui la flagornait. Non, ce ne fut pas le cas. Les personnes qu’elle
voyait constamment, et dont quelques-unes étaient aimables, n’étant pas
toutes supérieures, s’illusionnèrent sur la valeur de leur hôtesse et
Égérie, et y allèrent bon jeu bon argent de leur encens et de leurs
offrandes.

En ce qui concerne ces dernières, elle ne se montrait pas difficile,
préférant la quantité à la qualité. Au reste, celle-ci se déguisait
peut-être à ses yeux; au moins s’amplifiait de cet augment que
conférait, pour elle, au moindre grain de mil, l’idée qu’il lui était
destiné. En somme, elle représenta parfaitement la _tenui popano
corruptus Osiris_ de l’antiquité, la divinité qu’on se gagne par une
friandise. Et cette friandise, c’était moins la babiole, que la sauce
qui l’accompagnait de compliments et de fariboles.

On sait que le mangeur de haschisch est mis, par sa drogue, dans un tel
état d’illusion, que le moindre bruit lui paraît un chant. La drogue de
la Marquise fut sa vanité, qui lui fit perpétuellement prendre, avec
bonheur, des vessies pour des lanternes.

Il est entendu que les amis n’aiment pas à donner. Mais quand on vit
qu’elle se contentait de si peu, on marcha; pas dans les grands prix.
Comme on le verra, quelques-uns abusèrent.

Il se trouva bien aussi, parmi cette acclimatation de familiers,
quelques renards, pour vouloir goûter au fromage de cette bavarde
corvine. Mais le fromage n’était pas gros. On sait au juste ce qu’il
représentait. Le chiffre en est porté, dans la marge d’un des agendas:
«revenu annuel 45.986 francs 94 centimes.» Il n’y a pas grand’chose à
faire, pour les renards, quand le «phénix des hôtes de ces bois»
connaît, à ce point, le compte des centimes et le prix du beurre.

La maligne écrit elle-même, plaisamment, un jour d’étrennes: «Charles
Buet voudrait célébrer mon être en lettres de diamant, tracées sur une
table d’émeraude. Cela réclamait plus que les cinquante francs envoyés
le matin.»

                                   *

                                 *   *

Ces offrandes, nous les retrouverons toutes; elles sont là, pavant
l’enfer de la Salle d’Eckmühl, de leurs bonnes intentions
problématiques. Nous les rencontrerons au cours de la visite que nous
allons y faire et qu’il sied de ne plus différer. Autant que possible,
je m’abstiendrai de tout commentaire, afin de laisser parler d’eux-mêmes
les objets et leur description, me bornant à ce qui me semblera
nécessaire pour souligner ou renforcer le spectacle et la gloire.

Tout au plus, avant de l’entreprendre, ce pèlerinage passionné, me
semble-t-il désirable d’attirer l’attention du lecteur sur le tour
particulier de la phrase de Madame de Blocqueville (dirai-je: le ronron
de cette grosse chatte?) qui, dans la description de son catalogue, non
moins que dans les notations de son agenda, rapproche, avec une
imperturbable sérénité et un sourire déconcertant, les éléments les plus
disparates et les sentiments les plus divers. De bonne heure on a dû
dire à la malheureuse qu’elle avait du tour, qu’elle excellait à
trousser le billet. C’en fut fait, elle était perdue, au moins pour la
tapisserie.

  EXTRAITS DU CATALOGUE DE LA SALLE D’ECKMÜHL

  Encrier de Jacob... un monstre à gueule béante reçoit l’encre, ses
  oreilles servent de porte-plume.

  Guéridon de forme ronde _(pléonasme)_. C’est devant cette table que,
  tous les 14 octobre, le Général de Trobriand nous racontait la
  bataille d’Auerstaëdt.

  Tabouret d’acajou, appelé _X_, de forme à peu près grecque. Étant sans
  dossier, c’était le meuble où l’on devait, jeune fille, se tenir
  assise.

  Chaise sculptée par Grohé, lors de mon mariage. Elle fut alors dorée
  et peinte par le Capitaine Ernest de Cissey.

  Une autre chaise. Le cuir noir qui la recouvrait, tombait en lambeaux;
  je l’ai remplacé par une bande de tapisserie, fort belle, relevée de
  peluche rouge.

  Deux corps de bibliothèque, ornés de perroquets, d’oiseaux d’eau, de
  plantes, _à la façon chinoise_... laqués d’un ton jaune d’ocre, relevé
  de rouge antique. Il y a aussi des niches du plus élégant dessin
  _persan_. Au-dessous de la corniche, j’ai voulu de grandes branches
  folles de jasmin, ce cher amoureux de la lumière. Les deux niches
  intérieures sont occupées par d’admirables vases... rapportés _de
  l’Inde_, par mon frère qui les tenait du gouverneur _anglais_[2].

  [2] Ailleurs: «Ils n’ont pas leurs pareils en France.» En réalité, ce
    sont d’assez jolis vases. Voilà tout. Encore la blague. Au reste,
    l’un d’eux est endommagé.

  J’ai voulu leur faire un écrin digne d’eux. Deux œufs d’autruche ornés
  de perles, à la façon _africaine_, donnés à ma mère, et reçus d’elle,
  pendent au-dessus des vases.--Dans les deux niches extérieures,
  terminant à pan coupé la bibliothèque, un nègre et une négresse,
  rapportés de _Venise_, d’un travail très fin, soutiennent un flambeau.
  Une petite lanterne chinoise, ornée de plaques d’émail, et de glands à
  beaux verres peints, pend au-dessus de chaque statuette.

  Ces bibliothèques, d’un prix considérable, sont aussi originales que
  charmantes.

Essayez seulement, si vous vivez encore, si le noir veut bien nous
prêter son flambeau ou, l’Empire du Milieu, sa petite lanterne, de vous
représenter ce que peut donner ce _chinois_ compliqué d’_antique_, de
_persan_, d’_indien_, d’_anglais_, d’_africain_, de _nègre_ et de
_vénitien_, sans oublier le _jasmin_, et vous deviendrez aussi fou que
les branches de ce cher amoureux de la lumière.

  Deux meubles en marqueterie... copiés sur des meubles du Roi Louis
  XIV.

N’oublions pas que, parlant de la Dame et de ses Soirées, d’Aurevilly
lâche le mot _blaguer_ et ajoute: «Tout du long de son livre, la
Marquise ne fait que cette vilaine chose-là.»

Suite des «blagues»:

  Deux armoires copiées sur des meubles de Madame de Maintenon, sauf en
  quelques variantes par moi désirées.--La seconde garde dans sa
  corniche les boutons de gilet du Maréchal et les chiffres de la
  Duchesse Arya-Eltha-Lucifera.

Ne manquez pas de reconnaître Adélaïde Louise d’Eckmühl, l’héroïne
déguisée de la villa; son noble père, avec ses boutons de gilet; elle,
avec ses boutons de jasmin.

  Une table à dessin... J’ai peint là un manuscrit sur parchemin et
  beaucoup d’autres choses.

Elle peignait aussi.

  Deux petites chaises (modèle étrusque) couvertes d’étoffe persane...
  et terminées, l’une par deux oies en bronze chinois servant de
  brûle-parfum, et posées sur les montants du dossier, l’autre, par une
  chimère et un personnage accroupi...

  Un élégant flambeau en bronze chinois... représente un ibis, _un
  prêtre ou une sorcière_: don du Commandant de Coatpont.

  Premier obus envoyé par l’armée de Versailles, sur le Palais des
  Beaux-Arts. Il a passé à quelques lignes au-dessus de ma tête, pour
  aller éclater dans mon appartement, le 25 mai 1871.--J’ai fait monter
  l’obus _qui a rasé mon front_, sur un petit bastion de pierre; et on a
  peint, dans le creux, l’ancien Palais Mazarin.

  Charmante statuette de bronze, œuvre de Monsieur Mouton... résumant
  une boutade de la Duchesse Eltha. L’homme à tête de porc, à cornes de
  taureau, à corps et à jambes d’autruche, à longue queue de renard et à
  mains de singe, sculpté par Monsieur Mouton est tout à fait amusant.
  D’un air mélancolique, ce jeune homme, fait d’un métal argenté, se
  tient debout sur un socle de porphyre rouge, gravé de cette légende:
  L’homme d’après la Marquise de Blocqueville. Exemplaire unique.

  _Boriko_... avec ses paniers arabes, de Barye, je crois. C’est le
  portrait vivant des chers petits ânes qu’on rencontre, à chaque pas,
  en Afrique.

  Portrait de la jolie Marquise du Luc... Pendant les combats de la
  Commune, une balle est venue piquer ce tableau, placé au-dessus du
  canapé où je m’étais réfugiée; j’ai fait placer cette balle, avec une
  inscription, dans le bas du portrait.

  Buste ancien[3], de grandeur héroïque... _On le trouve plus beau que
  celui du Louvre._

  [3] D’un Médicis.

  Joli petit melon chinois, en faïence de plusieurs verts, acheté par
  moi dans le singulier village hollandais de Brooke, afin d’être très
  convaincue, si je le retrouvais en autre lieu, que, pour la seconde
  fois, ce n’était pas en rêve que j’avais visité ce pays joujou.

Voici maintenant la collection de cachets. Le Musée Saint-Saëns a la
sienne, Auxerre ne pouvait faire moins.

  Voici le dernier que j’aie fait faire. Sur le socle doré, d’un
  éléphant argenté, est gravé _le refrain_ d’une vieille chanson
  française: «J’ai dans l’âme une fleur que nul n’a pu cueillir.»

Sauf votre respect, Madame la Marquise, la vieille chanson française
n’est rien moins qu’une poésie de Victor Hugo, et des plus célèbres,
dont le premier vers est celui-ci:

    Puisque j’ai mis ma lèvre à ta coupe encore pleine.

Celui que vous citez n’est pas exact. Il faut _ne peut_ au lieu de _n’a
pu_.

  Champignon de bois sculpté, monté en argent et gravé, en souvenir
  d’une parole de l’Écriture, d’un _élégant chameau_ et de Memento.

  Cachet de cristal, à lien d’argent, gravé en arabe du nom de Louise.

Au Musée de Dieppe, nous avons le cachet avec le nom de Saint-Saëns, en
caractères chinois.

  Joli paon de cornaline... J’ai fait graver sur ce bijou la devise du
  cachet personnel et de jeunesse du pauvre Empereur Maximilien:
  _Kallibiotik_, mot de la vieille langue des Bohèmes, qui signifie: par
  tous les moyens honnêtes, rendre la vie agréable.

Ne vous semble-t-il pas entendre Coquelin Cadet, sous les espèces de
Covielle déguisé, expliquer à Monsieur Jourdain les beautés de la langue
orientale, «qui dit beaucoup de choses en peu de mots» et faire suivre
de cacophoniques polysyllabes tels que, par exemple, _Kakarakamouchen_,
d’interminables interprétations, telles que «votre cœur soit toujours
comme un rosier fleuri» ou le souhait d’associer la prudence du lion à
la force du serpent?

M’est avis qu’un voyageur mauvais plaisant pourrait bien, avec son
_Kallibiotik_, s’être payé la tête de l’aimable Marquise.

  Petit sanglier doré, donné par une vieille amie de ma gouvernante.

  Trois balles ramassées Tour Malakoff et montées en cachet. Ce souvenir
  guerrier m’a été offert, à Alger, par le Colonel Renou. Sur la plaque
  d’argent, j’ai fait graver mon oiseau favori, une cigogne.

  Un pèlerin... Sur le pied j’ai fait graver, en mémoire d’une parole de
  Marguerite (?) un poisson volant et cette légende: _nec, nec._

  Grenouille trouvée, en Égypte, dans un tombeau, portant une scène
  bizarre profondément entaillée: _un diable à trois cornes semble faire
  danser_ un _crocodile_. Roger de Sédières, petit-fils de ma tante de
  Beaumont, m’a rapporté, de la terre des Pharaons, ce souvenir que j’ai
  fait monter, en argent oxydé, de fleurs de lotus.

  Grand cachet d’argent, autrefois commandé en Afrique, par le colonel
  Ernest de Cissey; il célèbre la Comtesse Louise, _avec la pompe
  Arabe_.

  Éventail énorme... commandé par Madame la Duchesse de Berry, et arrivé
  trop tard; il fut acheté à Fossin et mis dans ma corbeille.

Encore la vilaine chose stigmatisée par d’Aurevilly. Et ci-dessous:

  Écu d’argent... C’est dans cet écu que Louis XV, au jeu, passait ses
  billets à la Duchesse de Châteauroux.

  Pile de sous renversés par le tremblement de terre de la Guadeloupe,
  et mis en fusion par le feu; cadeau de mon cousin, le Vicomte Davoust.

  _Délicieux sabot pointu_ formant boîte... une chinoise lit sur le
  couvercle. Donné par la Vicomtesse de Janzé.

  Petit coffret... que l’on croit avoir appartenu à la Reine Margot.

Encore la vilaine chose.

  Deux énormes pendants d’oreilles. Je les ai fait monter par un
  sculpteur italien, Angelo Francia, Benvenuto Cellini au petit pied.

A la petite main serait plus juste.

  Deux bracelets... je portais souvent ces bracelets d’une ornementation
  riche et sévère, et ils étaient toujours admirés.

  Anneaux d’or... Ces larges bracelets rappellent les vieux bijoux
  grecs, autant que le _you-you_ arabe, le _jov-jov_ des anciens.

  Broche... ce bijou m’a été donné, le 17 mai 1864, à Rome, par la
  Princesse Carolyne de Sayn-Wittgenstein, qui avait bien voulu me
  servir de marraine pour la confirmation. Je n’avais jamais été
  confirmée, etc...

  Plume de corail... elle me fut envoyée par la Princesse Carolyne, avec
  les lignes suivantes: «Cette plume n’est qu’un joujou, mais elle vous
  revient comme symbole de la vôtre; comme celle-ci, elle a trempé dans
  des vagues agitées et amères, dans des profondeurs où le vulgaire
  n’atteint pas et où se trouvent les perles précieuses, les naïades
  fantasques et tout un monde enchanté.»

  Cassolette... Émeraude sur le couvercle de cette _gracieuse petite
  marmite d’or_.

  Collier... La pièce vraiment curieuse du collier est un petit sequin
  d’or, qui ornait les cheveux de Lady Esther Stanhope, lors de sa mort,
  et qui m’a été rapporté d’Orient. Suspendu et mobile au centre d’un
  cercle d’or, bombé, doublé et bordé d’une légère corde, il porte écrit
  en lettres fantômes, d’un côté: _A Esther Stanhope, je fus!_ de
  l’autre: _à Louise d’Eckmühl, je suis!_

  Petite épingle d’or... bijou favori fait par un véritable artiste,
  Riballier, tué en cherchant un secret chimique pour blanchir les
  diamants du Cap.

  Broche... Ce bijou est attribué à Benvenuto Cellini.

Encore la vilaine chose.

  Deux croissants... Ces boucles d’oreilles données par la Comtesse de
  Gervillier, me plaisaient beaucoup et ont fait avec moi tout le voyage
  d’Italie, en 1878.

  La Comtesse de Chaponay m’ayant donné deux petites lanternes pendants
  d’oreilles, j’ai pensé que, si Diogène s’était contenté d’une lanterne
  pour chercher un homme, il en faudrait bien deux pour observer les
  âmes... et encore! J’ai donc fait enchâsser les gentils bijoux _dans
  un vrai conte de fée délicatement ciselé_.

  Pendants d’oreilles... Des deux boutons pend une corde souple, à
  laquelle est attachée une petite sonnette d’or, chargée de mots grecs
  et destinée à chasser le mauvais sort par son Drinn-Drinn.--Le modèle
  de cette clochette a été trouvé au pied d’une statue _dont j’ai la
  photographie_.

  Nous terminerons l’inventaire de cette collection de boucles
  d’oreilles par la description d’un roseau long comme une petite main
  et ayant la forme d’un bâton, que les indigènes de certaines parties
  du Brésil se passent dans l’oreille. Ils nous semblent pouvoir lutter,
  du moins pour la longueur de cet appendice, avec nos chers et patients
  et très calomniés baudets d’Europe.

  Bague étrange en or vierge curieusement travaillé et enroulé par un
  artiste nègre. Amand de Trobriand, ayant été envoyé en mission à
  Guinchabo, près du roi noir d’Attla, celui-ci lui donna ce bijou. Lors
  de nos désastres, le bon Amatifou envoya, en 1871, vingt mille francs
  pour le rachat de la France, son alliée. Bien des rois blancs n’ont
  point agi aussi généreusement que le noir Samaritain, dont je respecte
  l’anneau, cadeau du petit-fils de mon vieil ami.

  Bague des fiancés du Liban. Elle est composée de petites perles
  enfilées et de petits sequins d’or qui pleuvent coquettement sur le
  doigt.

  Bague en _prisme_ d’émeraude...

Chère Madame, on dit: _prime_!... Ce bijou vous a été donné pour votre
confirmation? Alors, vous méritiez la petite calotte!

  Bague d’or... Elle raconte mystiquement un rêve peint par Mademoiselle
  Roberts.

  Bague à étoile de diamants sur améthyste, plusieurs fois transformée
  avant de s’envelopper de lilas.

  Gros et long serpent d’or vert... C’est là vraiment une œuvre d’art
  qui mérite d’être mise à l’abri d’un jeune caprice _ou d’un héritier
  inintelligent_.

Pas très aimable pour la famille!

Suit une historiette, à propos de deux glands de perles:

  Une fois mariée je les fis monter avec des feuilles de chêne en
  diamants, puis ils ont fini par tomber, feuilles et glands, _du bec
  d’un Saint-Esprit_ d’opales et diamants.

  Coffret dans lequel Madame Louise de France, fille de Louis XV, avait
  donné ses belles émeraudes à la jeune Dauphine.

Encore la vilaine chose!

  Mosquée de Pondichéry, _sculptée dans la moelle d’un palmier_, avec
  ses minarets, ses terrasses et ses colonnades.

  Comme opposition à cette blancheur et à cette légèreté, nous décrirons
  un beau et lourd coffret monumental, doublé de bois de santal et
  _taillé, à côté, dans les noires cornes d’un buffle_.

  Figurines indiennes... indien monté à chameau; indien monté à vache;
  vache harnachée, mais non montée.

  Petite boîte de l’Inde, rouge, jaune et verte, contenant une souris.

  Échantillon de la fameuse herbe de _houla_... C’est l’Abbé Huc qui m’a
  donné l’herbe sèche que voilà.

  Joujoux Japonais: monstre jaune et tortue branlante.

  Miroir rond... enfermé dans une boîte en peau d’hippopotame, glace des
  femmes touaregs.--Cadeau du Consul d’Espagne.

  Savon de Jérusalem... rapporté par Monsieur Cirelli.

  Flacon de coco, sculpté à Brest, par un forçat célèbre.

  Intérieur d’une cellule de carmélite, introduit dans un petit œuf.

  Modèle, en miniature, du chapeau des femmes de Moulins, en 1847.

  Poupée habillée du costume exigé pour les baigneuses de Néris, en
  1874.

  Échantillon de la soie blanche que l’on tire du Sorgho.

  Petit balai dont le sommet frisé, perché au haut d’un bâton, terminé
  par une pareille boule plus petite, rappelle la tête d’un chien de la
  Havane. C’est avec de pareils instruments que, le vendredi saint, on
  lave les autels de la basilique vaticane. Dom d’Achille voulut bien
  m’en procurer un.

  Très grand album contenant un délicieux portrait du Chevalier de
  Paravey appuyé sur un pain de sucre...

  Dent d’un requin tué en Colombie, dans les chasses que le Général de
  Trobriand faisait avec Bolivar, chasses dont j’ai raconté quelques
  épisodes[4]. Je tiens du Général, _qui y attachait un prix de
  souvenir_, cette dent de requin.

  [4] Toujours dans _les Jasmins_.

  Coquille d’huître trouvée dans le Far-West, à une grande altitude, par
  le Général Régis de Trobriand. Je la tiens de lui.

Et voilà. Notez que, sauf pour les quelques derniers numéros, qui m’ont
paru gagner à se grouper ainsi, j’ai cité dans l’ordre.

Ce serait le moment, selon la belle expression de Shelley, de «laisser
le silence remplir la pause obscure». Mais comment, d’autre part,
résister aux réflexions qu’entraîne pareil défilé?

Je ne vois que la fresque de Gozzoli, au Palais Ricardi, et certains
passages de la _Tentation de Saint Antoine_, par Flaubert, qui me
semblent pouvoir lui être comparés. Il faudrait un Jérôme Bosch,
compliqué d’Aubrey Beardsley, pour représenter ce cortège d’amis, sans
doute loin de s’imaginer l’honneur réservé à leurs étranges cadeaux,
quand ils les rapportaient chacun de son point du monde. Geste spontané
et sans apprêt, qui leur assure, bon gré, mal gré, de se voir
représentés indéfiniment, chacun tenant son petit bateau, tant que ce
catalogue durera ou que se prolongera ma glose.

Je crois voir la Reine de Saba offrant au héros du Maître de Croisset
«le bouclier de Djann-ben-Djian, celui qui a construit les Pyramides»,
lorsque le Consul d’Espagne tend à Madame de Blocqueville ce miroir
rond, seule glace des femmes touaregs, enfermé dans une boîte en peau
d’hippopotame. Et voici le Commandant de Coatpont, avec son ibis, son
prêtre (ou sa sorcière); Mouton, avec sa statuette folle; la vieille
amie de la gouvernante, avec son petit sanglier doré; le Colonel Renou,
avec les trois balles de la Tour Malakoff, servant de support à une
cigogne; Monsieur de Sedières, avec la grenouille qui porte, sur le
flanc, un diable tricornard, faisant danser un crocodile; Monsieur de
Cissey célébrant la Comtesse Louise, avec la pompe arabe; le Vicomte
Davoust, avec la pile de sous renversés et mis en fusion par le
tremblement de terre de la Guadeloupe. Voici la Vicomtesse de Janzé,
avec son délicieux sabot pointu, et Mademoiselle de Boureuille avec sa
gracieuse petite marmite; la Princesse de Sayn, la marraine de
confirmation, avec sa plume de corail; la Comtesse de Gervillier avec
ses croissants, et la Comtesse de Chaponay avec ses lanternes.

Voici le jeune Trobriand, avec la bague du bon Amatifou, le roi noir
d’Attla, et le traducteur de Kheyam, avec le sequin de Lady Stanhope.
Voici Madame Émile Ollivier, avec la mosquée de Pondichéry, sculptée
dans la moelle. Enfin, les trois derniers, comme les trois Rois Mages,
présentent, l’un, Monsieur Cirelli, le savon de Jérusalem; l’autre, Dom
d’Achille, le petit balai du Vatican; et le Général Régis, la valve
étonnante, peut-être bien, simplement, après tout, laissée, sur un
sommet, par des touristes en excursion, des promeneurs en pique-nique.

                                   *

                                 *   *

Ce défilé que j’évoque, il eut lieu dans la réalité, durant près d’un
demi-siècle; et il ne tient qu’à vous d’en voir processionner le reflet,
dans les quarante-deux agendas que j’ai eu l’honneur de vous signaler,
et que nous allons examiner maintenant.

Je me souviens d’un document arabe, qui représente le Fils de David en
colloque avec la Reine des Fourmis. Celle-ci fait défiler de ses
sujettes, devant le Roi des Rois, pendant je ne sais combien de jours,
au bout desquels, elle apprend au souverain qu’elle en possède soixante
et dix fois autant.

Il demande grâce.

Il y a de cela dans les agendas de Madame de Blocqueville.

Il y a aussi une forme renouvelée de la doctrine de Nietzsche, la
théorie de _l’éternel retour_ de Madame Beulé, de Mademoiselle de
Lagrenée, de Miss Reed, des Diémer, des Dorange, des Rigodit, des Chiala
et _tutti quanti_.

Les quelques fragments que je possède, de cet interminable fatras, se
peuvent ranger sous trois rubriques. La première contiendra tout ce qui
ressortit à une vanité naïve et folle, une vanité de vieille petite
fille gâtée.

Elle-même en convient:

  «_On gâte ce mauvais Moi, et il a dormi._ Thanks to God!»

Parfois elle laisse passer le bout de l’oreille qui, pour ne pas être
aussi longue que celle de «nos chers baudets», laisse voir l’excessive
éclosion de son amour-propre:

  X... me souhaite de rester _belle, bonne, spirituelle_ et
  _captivante_, comme je suis. Poison insinuant que l’on boit avec
  délices, tout en n’y croyant pas.

Une petite pirouette finale, qui n’est là que pour attirer l’attention
et l’augmenter par l’apparente modestie; nous n’en avons pas moins notre
_confitentem ream_, laquelle, d’ailleurs, continue de se découvrir:

  La vieille Florence, mon ancienne cuisinière, en me trouvant
  _rajeunie, belle_ et _claire de teint_, a capté mon jugement. _Par un
  coin, on est toujours un peu sultan._

Et elle ajoute, par un de ces traits de comique involontaire, qui lui
sont particuliers:

  Je l’ai recommandée à une Dame qui, venue aux renseignements, est
  _tombée en extase devant mon caoutchouc!_

A qui la faute, si ce n’est à ses amis, vraiment un peu «monteurs de
coup.» Certes, le terrain est favorable, mais ils l’engraissent
terriblement. C’est elle qui le dit:

  On me promet l’immortalité la plus reculée.

Et les voilà s’interrompant d’apporter des «tortues branlantes» ou la
soie du sorgho, pour asséner des coups d’encensoirs, qui achèvent
d’exalter notre brave corneille:

  Fanny me dit qu’_en Suède et en Norvège_, tout ce qui me touche,
  passionne.

Cette Fanny pourrait bien être Miss Reed qui, dans ce temps-là,
chantait.--Oh! Mademoiselle, pourquoi contribuer ainsi à la crédule
infatuation de votre vieille amie? C’est, sans doute, pour cela que le
Bon Dieu vous a retiré votre voix. Comment l’en blâmer?

  Mon paquet fragile et ma lettre sortent des Jardins d’Aladin.

Il s’agit d’un présent envoyé à Octave Feuillet, qui remercie en ces
termes expressifs.

  Monsieur Enault s’étonne que des mains aussi petites puissent contenir
  tant de bienfaits.

Et il ajoute:

  En 70, on disait: la Marquise, dans le quartier, comme on disait
  autrefois: la Reine.

  Louis Teste parle avec enthousiasme des Soirées de la Villa des
  Jasmins, œuvre colossale!

  Madame Arthur Baignères m’a déclaré que, dans cette parure lilas et
  jaune, j’étais encore _ce qu’il y avait de plus charmant_, dans mon
  charmant salon.

Un Monsieur Chiala se dit _effrayé_ de l’esprit qui s’y dépense. Il y a
de quoi; on aurait peur à moins.

                   *       *       *       *       *

Gaston Planté déclare que la Dame a «semé le germe de toutes les
découvertes de l’avenir». Aussi vous verrez de quel accent elle le
pleurera!

Au reste, elle n’a pas à se plaindre de cette famille: le célèbre
pianiste, frère du précédent, se fait photographier «tenant à la main un
exemplaire de _Perdita_.»

Voici maintenant des religieux.

  Le cher Abbé Dumax donne l’hospitalité à mon jasmin dans son
  bréviaire.

Un autre (qu’elle avoue «menacé de folie») «rêve un travail sur la thèse
du jasmin».

                   *       *       *       *       *

Et c’est une épître d’un troisième qui lui arrache cette exclamation:

  Superbe coup de cloche du Père Anselme pour m’appeler à la conquête du
  Ciel!

Suite des litanies:

  Lettre de Monsieur Matout (?) _exaltant les dons qui sont mon partage_
  et de Valentine Bibesco qui tient à se glisser tout près de mon cœur.

  Mes salons décrits, mes livres exaltés, mes billets célébrés, d’un
  tour si vif et d’une allure si française qu’ils feront un jour la
  fortune des collectionneurs d’autographes.

L’un lui déclare que son visage est «de ceux qu’on n’oublie pas»;
l’autre qu’elle est «souverainement gracieuse parce que souverainement
bonne et admirablement belle, sous ses cheveux d’argent, avec son teint
lisse et reposé.» Une jeune demoiselle, à qui elle a envoyé un petit
bijou «_se relève la nuit_ pour l’admirer». Celui-ci lui parle de ses
_lettres feu d’artifice_; et celui-là l’intitule: _la Fille du Lion!_

Les cités s’en mêlent. Elle reçoit «un brevet d’honneur envoyé par la
ville du Havre».

De tout cela, elle se gargarise. Alors, elle divague, parle de son «soir
de triomphe», de son «suprême jour de beauté». Et elle ajoute:

  Les événements me conseillent la hâte. Inconséquence de l’esprit. Je
  crois à une fin prochaine de notre terre, et je tiens à m’y ancrer. Je
  voudrais _laisser une trace_ poétique[5].

  [5] Goncourt disait: «Si j’avais su que le monde ne devait durer que
    tant de milliards d’années, _je n’aurais pas écrit_.»

C’est fait. Elle continue:

  J’ai eu parfois, l’instinct que j’étais _le résumé vivant de toutes
  les aspirations et de toutes les douleurs de mon siècle_.

Excusez du peu!

C’est alors qu’elle se croit permis de faire la difficile:

  Vraiment la race humaine est prête à grossir le succès, comme les
  badauds grossissent les foules.--_Une trentaine de personnes
  refusées._

  Des lettres et des cartes à en élever un bastion.

Et elle ne fait exception que pour le Duc de Brancas, parce que,
dit-elle, «_il a jadis dansé avec moi!_»

                   *       *       *       *       *

Le plus curieux de tout cela c’est, qu’à d’autres moments que ces
minutes de vanité sincère, dont elle nous a fait l’aveu, elle poursuit,
dans les autres, ce péché mignon qu’elle cultive, pour elle, avec tant
de passion.

Déjà, dans le catalogue, elle nous apprend que le meilleur moyen de
tirer parti d’une personnalité farouche, est de _presser la pédale de la
vanité, seule capable de résonner dans une âme uniquement remplie
d’elle-même_.

Dans les notes, elle nous parle d’une amie possédée du «besoin de
s’occuper d’elle.»--«Elle est vraiment amusante, mais avec quelle
naïveté elle s’admire.»--«Elle sera très heureuse par sa naïve et
profonde foi en elle-même.»

La parabole de la paille et de la poutre réalisa-t-elle jamais pareille
application?

Et cependant, il y a la critique, la petite et la grande. Une de ses
nièces (oh! les familles!) fait chez elle une entrée brusque pour lui
annoncer qu’elle est _insultaillée par Étincelle_.--Mais, du terrible et
beau chapitre de d’Aurevilly, que pense-t-elle, que dit-elle?--Je n’en
relève qu’une faible trace, page 256 du Catalogue, à propos d’un article
de Pontmartin «sur M. Barbey d’Aurevilly», terminé par le conseil
d’aller se jeter aux pieds de ses victimes, Rue du Bac, puis Quai
Malaquais (Ces deux derniers mots _en capitales_).

C’est tout; mais les agendas du temps sont peut-être plus explicites.
Cela serait curieux à vérifier.

En attendant, elle reprend assez vite pied dans son illusion et
recommence à faire la risette. Ses correspondants et ses visiteurs l’y
aident. L’un d’eux a fait garnir son appartement, de glaces, _pour se
donner une illusion de galerie_. Elle serait bien capable d’en faire
autant, la bonne Dame, si la réception faisait défaut. Mais il n’y a pas
de chômage. Et, pour miroirs, elle a les yeux de Charles Buet, de Lizzie
Heckel et du Chevalier de Paravey.

N’allez pourtant pas croire qu’elle soit dénuée de _jugement_. Elle a
ses bonnes heures, où elle nous donne, de cette qualité, de sérieuses ou
plaisantes preuves, dont je compose un second groupe.

  J’ai attendu Madame de Rambuteau, venue me prendre pour me conduire à
  _Fédora_. Arrivée au théâtre, je me demandais si c’était bien moi.

  Cette pièce de Sardou est inouïe de médiocrité. Une mosaïque des
  Danicheff, un plagiat réaliste du premier acte des Huguenots.
  Seulement Fédora n’est point une Valentine et ne laisse pas partir son
  amant.

  Sarah Bernhardt est médiocre, sauf dans les deux derniers actes. Elle
  se roule comme une panthère, féline en vraie slave. Sa dernière robe,
  impossible, à fleurs immenses, est belle, étrange.

  Berton est bon dans le dernier acte.

  Une telle pièce est un triste symptôme de l’état mental de notre
  temps; donc, curieuse, mais point intéressante.

  Sophie Menter est véritablement grande artiste, simple et puissante,
  réunit la force à la grâce, rappelle le jeu de Liszt. Et ses yeux sont
  tout un roman.

                   *       *       *       *       *

  Mesdames Beulé et de Janzé sont venues battre l’air de leurs récits
  mondains.

La première est «aigre comme une grappe de raisin vert».

  Madame de Janzé me dit que c’est _le Gaulois_ qui a appris à la pauvre
  Madame de Beaumont qu’elle a un cancer.

La même visiteuse conte l’histoire du cocher de la même dame...

  S’arrêtant devant un christ dans les environs de Marly, et s’écriant:
  «C’est pitié, Seigneur Christ, de vous voir si maigre! On dirait que
  vous mangez avec nous à l’office de Madame la Comtesse.»

                   *       *       *       *       *

  Alix nous a raconté comment le Shah a envoyé un homme à cheval
  prévenir la Princesse Mathilde de sa visite, et lui dire de faire
  préparer une chaise percée et de l’eau glacée.

  En arrivant, sans se gêner, il a couru à la chaise, et mangé et bu en
  vrai sauvage.

  A Londres, il a voulu acheter Lady Roseberry, et même la Princesse de
  Galles, étonné d’une résistance au Shah de Perse.

                   *       *       *       *       *

  La belle Comtesse de Mailly-Nesle a ébloui l’assistance par sa fierté
  d’amazone.

                   *       *       *       *       *

  Valentine Bibesco se fait syrène, quand elle a besoin de vous.

                   *       *       *       *       *

  Monsieur Bourdeau, être pensant, parmi toutes ces cailles jacasses. Un
  vrai intelligent, _bien plus profond_ que son beau-père.

  Le Docteur Courbeyre, d’une séduction bizarre; des airs d’oiseaux des
  tropiques, sauvages et câlins, que je ne connais qu’à lui.

                   *       *       *       *       *

  Diemer, burlesque, jouant en moustaches, un rôle de femme, à
  Trouville, dans une comédie de Massa.

                   *       *       *       *       *

  Monsieur de Béthisy, si honnêtement vaniteux!

                   *       *       *       *       *

  L’ennui enterré avec lui, il me reste, du pauvre chevalier[6], qui
  m’aimait sincèrement, un souvenir affectueux et tout fait d’estime.

  [6] De Paravey.

  Monsieur de X...[7] faisant claquer son ratelier, comme un alligator
  de féerie.

  [7] Les noms sont dans l’original.

  Visite des Z... Elle, _qui a remarqué le départ de mon beau
  secrétaire. Elle a un œil de commissaire-priseur._--Quel triste mari,
  grognon, nul, ennuyeux comme _Excelsior_ où j’avais eu la sotte idée
  de les conduire.--Leur fils laid, mais spirituel; aussi éveillé que le
  père est endormi.

Suivent:

  Une grande grosse femme, de force à supporter les tristesses de la
  vie.

Une autre:

  Bouffie, importante et ridicule.

Une autre encore avec:

  Un chapeau-parapluie et une robe vert-printemps.

Des réflexions philosophiques:

  C’est un Allemand qui, me voyant debout, a voulu me donner sa
  place.--O chère vieille France, élégante et polie, qu’es-tu devenue?

Puis, comme elle est douloureusement malade, en même temps que sa sœur
et sa cousine, elle s’écrie:

  Trois parentes _ennemies_, ensemble torturées... dernière sympathie!

Ce dernier trait n’est-il pas assez beau, comme les autres sont assez
jolis?

Voici maintenant de ces traits de comique, notés ailleurs, et dans
lesquels il y a d’une drôlerie naturelle dont les effets lui échappent.

  Que de peine pour cette demeure d’un jour! On est venu conférer du
  Petit Saint-Thomas, décider une table de peluche. Il s’agit de ne pas
  paraître trop dépouillée aux yeux de mes nièces.

  M. V... ramenée aux souvenirs par la mort de son père, mais qui semble
  avoir trouvé les potiches vertes jolies.

  M... me demande tendrement à m’emprunter mille francs.

  J’ai copié du grand volume d’autographes en regardant sauter mes
  poissons rouges, installés par Aubert, sur la fenêtre de mon petit
  salon, parmi une forêt naine de plantes vertes et de fleurs, pour me
  remercier d’un habit du matin.

  Malade, ce jour de fête et de mort de ma mère, je me sentais
  indiciblement triste, et j’ai dû écrire vingt et une lettres pour
  décommander demain. Mon cœur voulait cet hommage pour le souvenir de
  Laprade.

  Une caisse de coquillages et une bécasse portant à la patte: Mes
  dernières volontés sont d’être mangées par Dame d’un grand cœur et
  d’un grand esprit.--J’ai reconnu l’essence des Trobriand, deviné
  Adolphe.

  J’ai lu l’office, terminé le Vicaire de Wakefield et reçu une bonne
  lettre de Monsieur Denormandie.

  Christine me dit que les fruits confits viennent d’elle, et me raconte
  les tristesses de sa vie.

Et, à la suite de cette bécasse testatrice, de ces potiches
lacrymatoires, et de ces _chinois_, recommence le cortège des cadeaux:

  Vœux et chocolats, dans une ravissante coupe de Bohème.

  Du gibier de Norvège et Madame Beulé.

  Alix, avec une gentille perdrix, mais triste.

  Une plume bénite pour moi par Léon XIII.

  _Et jusqu’à_ des cheveux de Monseigneur Bourget.

Serait-ce l’auteur de _Cruelle Énigme_ qu’elle appelle
ainsi!--Qu’arrivera-t-il, si elle va _jusqu’à l’altesse_?

Et, pour clore le défilé, voici paraître ses domestiques, lesquels lui
offrent (n’est-ce pas touchant?) un parapluie... qu’elle se refusait!

                                   *

                                 *   *

J’ai gardé pour la fin, trois notes qui demandent un peu plus de
développement, entraînant pour moi, souvenir et rêverie.

On sait l’attraction qu’exercèrent, en 89, sur les vieillards,
l’Exposition et la Tour Eiffel. Cette dernière surtout qui, le jour de
l’ouverture, fut prise d’assaut par des septuagénaires, un instant
rajeunis par cette inauguration de l’impossible.

La bonne Marquise fut de ceux-là. Elle nous conte son ascension avec
gaîté. L’an suivant elle devait mourir. Il semble que cette trêve de 89,
cette trêve à d’étranges, mais réels maux, lui ait été accordée pour
faire, sous cette forme exotique et cosmopolite qu’elle affectionnait,
ses adieux à la vie.

Adélaïde Louise, toute requinquée, va et vient du Quai Malaquais au
Champ de Mars. Elle rayonne, s’attife encore et, le soir, confie au cher
agenda: «Chacun est surpris de voir avec quelle élégance je m’habille.»

D’aucuns critiqueront cela. Je ne suis pas de leur avis. La vieillesse
est d’elle-même assez disgracieuse, pour que l’essai de réagir avec goût
me semble louable. Notre héroïne y réussissait-elle?--Là est la
question. Elle, vous le voyez, n’en doute pas. Mais laquelle de ses
manifestations lui inspirait un doute sincère?

Nous étions un peu jeune pour juger de ces atours, qui nous
apparaissaient bizarres, extravagants, en même temps que puérils[8].

  [8] Seraient intéressants à consulter, à ce propos, trois cahiers qui
    se suivent, au catalogue: _Mes coquetteries d’autrefois_, histoire
    des costumes; puis _Description de toilettes, etc..._ enfin, la
    _Clef des costumes_ des «entêtantes» soirées.

Elle était fort juponnée, et bouffante sur son canapé; elle faisait
penser à ces fillettes qui jouent en étalant et gonflant leur robe, à ce
qu’elles appellent: _faire un fromage_.

Ce fromage était surmonté d’une tête bien singulière; un visage à la
fois assez massif, aux traits assez fins, parmi lesquels, je m’en
souviens, des yeux bruns et brillants, un nez un peu fort, une grande
bouche aimable et rieuse d’où la voix sortait forte et timbrée. Mais
l’extraordinaire, c’était la haute coiffure toute blanche (je parle des
dix ou quinze dernières années) en racines droites, et qui avait
remplacé les bandeaux de naguère. On eût dit une vieille
Marie-Antoinette du Jeu Floral, ou si vous préférez, pour plus
d’exactitude, une Clémence Isaure, coiffée par Léonard. Mais ce n’est
pas tout. Cet édifice enfariné se couronnait de fleurs et de fruits en
abondance; oui, jusqu’à de petites pommes d’api en cire, que je revois
et qui se mêlaient aux fleurettes, comme dans ces bouquets sous globe
que l’on voit encore, en des vases dorés, dans des auberges de villages.

Les toilettes se composaient de combinaisons assez naïves. Jamais elle
ne donna dans le _grand faiseur_. Ce devait être fait à la maison, par
la femme de chambre, ou tout au moins par une couturière de quartier, et
sur un patron uniforme: une jupe cloche et le mantelet pareil, garni
d’un petit ruché régulier. «Ainsi troussée», elle s’asseyait au beau
milieu du canapé, sous son caoutchouc, et attendait le monde. Elle avait
l’air d’un gros joujou, d’une idole pour enfants, ou de l’une de ces
madones habillées d’étoffes et qui ressemblent à des poupées.

Revenons à l’Exposition, que je ne perds pas de vue, et où le personnage
ainsi décrit ne vous en apparaîtra que mieux, promenant son anachronisme
poudré et bouffant par la Rue du Caire ou parmi les restaurants du
Trocadéro, à s’exclamer sur les fontaines lumineuses.

Voici une phrase qui vous le présentera, et moi, par-dessus le marché;
elle est dans l’agenda de l’époque:

  «Le Pavillon Japonais, embaumé par de grands lis blancs d’un ineffable
  parfum, j’ai regardé avec intérêt les arbres forestiers réduits à
  l’état de jolis nains, dont le cher Abbé Huc m’avait tant parlé et
  dont le prix est de quatre cents à neuf cents francs. Un seul est
  acheté par le Comte de Montesquiou.»

La visiteuse ne dit pas lequel. C’était celui qui écrit ces lignes, dont
l’étendue, l’application et la sympathie amusée sont à sa louange.

Elle a bien pu penser qu’il s’agissait de moi, car elle m’avait connu;
mais, à ce jour, son commentaire se borne là.

Il doit y en avoir plus long ailleurs. En 78, où je lui fus ramené par
Pierre de Chaponay, à l’occasion d’un dîner pour Liszt, que je
souhaitais d’entendre.

Elle m’accueillit fort aimablement; mais que tout cela fut incohérent et
cocasse!

Le vieil abbé en soutanelle, avec sa tête de lion bougon, visiblement
las et embêté de ce qu’on sentait se préparer le concert à l’œil; avec,
en outre, le piège du voisinage d’une américaine qu’il avait, disait-on,
admirée autrefois et qui lui apparaissait aussi défraîchie que lui-même.
Mauvaise chère, dans la petite salle à manger, entre les vilains objets
qui se reconnaissent au Musée. Il y avait Mounet-Sully. En sortant de
table, je le jure, le grand pianiste, sans y être autrement convié, se
dirigea vers le grand piano, silencieusement l’ouvrit, joua trois airs,
se leva, sortit pour ne plus revenir, à la stupeur désespérée de
l’Amphitryonne toilettée et qui se préparait un triomphe, dont les
témoins projetés arrivèrent, une heure plus tard, encombrant l’escalier
de leur déception et de leurs plaintes.

Il me semble difficile que les babillards agendas ne racontent pas cette
folle soirée.

Nos relations se prolongèrent un peu; mais sans s’accentuer, ne
battirent que d’une aile, jusqu’au moment de s’envoler tout à fait.

J’étais sensible au comique de l’ensemble, mais moins qu’aujourd’hui et
l’ennui suintant du milieu, dans cet intérieur sans beauté, l’emporta;
je l’avoue, je tournai casaque.

Mais j’avais eu, de «la Fille du Lion» une vision bien antérieure.
Celle-là, au moment du mariage de ma sœur avec Cambacérès, propre neveu
de la Marquise. A l’occasion de ces noces elle avait probablement oublié
des inimitiés de famille, et paru à des dîners dans Savigny, le château
des siens.

Là, elle m’avait semblé plus grande (mais j’étais enfant) d’une assez
belle stature, brune, en bandeaux, avec une brillante expression de
visage, une coiffure de rubans noirs, et de longues boucles d’oreilles.

J’étais à table, auprès d’une Demoiselle Martin, gouvernante des petites
de Cambacérès. Et j’eus, dès lors, l’occasion de constater ce qui
m’apparaît mieux maintenant, le fâcheux esprit dont sont animées ces
institutrices. Celle-là ne cessa, durant tout le repas, de me _chiner_
la Marquise, à laquelle elle présentait d’ailleurs, le visage le plus
ouvert. Et je n’oublierai jamais l’étonnement avec lequel ma candeur
d’alors s’entendit conter, par cette Campan endiablée, que Madame de
Blocqueville possédait encore quantité d’autres noms et bien notamment
celui de _Marquise de Mille Savates_. (Elle aurait pu dire: mille
peignoirs).

Notez que tout cela se passait sous les yeux, presque sous le nez de la
Dame, à laquelle, s’interrompant de la dauber dans mon oreille, elle
envoyait par-dessus la table, des risettes et des douceurs.

Cette scène m’est restée présente, et je ne doute pas qu’elle n’ait eu
des suites, si je m’en rapporte à cette note des agendas:

  Zénaïde m’a parlé de Mademoiselle Martin en m’examinant. J’ai répondu
  par un silence de pierre.

La troisième et dernière note est plus délicate. Tâchons de l’aborder
délicatement. Elle a trait à ce qui pourrait bien être le _secret
sentimental_ de cette Comtesse d’Escarbagnas du Quai Malaquais,
laquelle, il faut l’espérer, vécut de meilleurs romans que ceux qu’elle
écrivit, enfin, ne fut pas de glace.

Je m’empresse d’ajouter (on le voit du reste à travers mes petites
querelles) que je la tiens pour une parfaite gentille dame dont comme
elle le disait fort bien, du Chevalier de Paravey «l’ennui enterré avec
elle, le souvenir me reste tout fait de sympathie et d’estime». Si donc,
je parle d’aventure, je n’entends rien qui ne soit digne d’elle, dans
les égarements du cœur. Elle avait été mal mariée; elle restait veuve et
libre. Je ne sais ce qu’on lui prêta. De plus proches d’elle par l’âge
et les relations pourraient en parler encore.

Je me contenterai donc de signaler ce passage significatif, découvert
dans l’un des petits cahiers:

  «Tout mon cœur tremble! Eustaquio administré, mourant, voulant me
  voir!--Tel est le rêve qui m’a éveillée, quand je murmurais: «Mon seul
  amour a été vous.»--C’est vrai, trop vrai.»

Il ne saurait s’agir ici d’indiscrétion. Le droit aux recherches dans un
Musée, ne peut pas être contesté; surtout, quand, ainsi que dans
celui-là, les moindres réserves ont été stipulées. Or, les agendas, non
seulement n’ont été ni détruits ni exclus, mais figurent au Catalogue,
bel et bien, pour la plupart, timbrés de bâtons de maréchaux, de
chiffres et de couronnes. Il ne pourrait donc être question, jamais, en
aucune façon, j’y insiste, d’en interdire, ni même d’en marchander la
lecture à ceux que la mémorialiste au petit pied (souvent dans le plat)
appelait: «des chercheurs de l’avenir.»

Je vais plus loin, je voudrais que de ses survivants amis (les parents
préfèrent toujours le silence) prissent la chose en main; que Madame de
Janzé (aujourd’hui Princesse de Faucigny-Lucinge), la séduisante Alix de
Choiseul-Gouffier, tant de fois mise en scène par ces intarissables
croquetons, que Miss Reed ou les Diemer assidus visiteurs de la
Marquise, se missent à piocher les calepins, pour en extraire et en
éditer ce qui peut intéresser ou amuser le monde. Ce n’est pas que je
croie à de grandes découvertes devant résulter de cet échenillage; ce
microscopique Saint-Simon, ce minuscule Dangeau s’arrêtait vite, pas
d’écrire (jamais!) non; mais de penser et de réfléchir. Néanmoins il y a
des surprises, des boutades parfois volontairement comiques, d’autres
fois inconsciemment, et ce ne sont pas les moins amusantes. Il y a aussi
des observations qui peuvent ne pas être sans leur menu prix, et des
jugements piquants sur bien des gens encore en vie. Enfin qui sait ce
que réserverait un déchiffrage approfondi de ce Journal? Je ne pense pas
qu’on y trouve «le germe de toutes les découvertes de l’avenir». Mais
enfin, qui sait? Car ainsi que le formule exactement, non pas le
Conservateur assez rébarbatif de la Salle d’Eckmühl, mais son gardien
bon enfant et doué d’esprit philosophique: «Y en a bougrement d’écrit
là-dessus. Elle en a mis du barbouillis.»

Quant à moi, j’ai fait ma cueillette, et crois pouvoir me vanter d’avoir
brodé, sur ce bas-bleu cher à d’Aurevilly, quelques attrayants ramages.

Drôlatique figure que celle de cette Philaminthe Napoléonienne, par
certains côtés si solennelle, par d’autres, si follette, bondissant hors
de son bain d’herbes, où elle fait, selon son expression, des
«coquetteries dans l’eau», pour aller recevoir un abbé, qui lui promet
la santé et lui prescrit des remèdes; entourée de son bestiaire (car les
monstres jaunes ne lui suffisaient pas; elle y ajoutait ses poissons
rouges, son doggey Consuelo, son chat Cendro et son izard privé Cawdor!)

Faudrait-il chercher beaucoup pour dénicher entre les bras de cette
«Romaine noblement drapée», cette oie qu’elle semble vouloir cacher,
comme la statuette de son muséum, mais que la tuméfaction de son jabot
dénonce au Monde?

Voici l’heure de la _philosophie religieuse_, dont elle a fondé le prix
à Toulouse, un beau jasmin de Riballier. Et elle se sent, c’est encore
sa locution, «emportée dans une transe pieuse et bleue».

Le moment arrive d’entendre ses visiteuses «battre l’air de leurs récits
mondains», car elle-même ne sort plus guère. Et elle pense à Salomon, en
entendant Madame de Janzé lui raconter les tristesses de sa vie.

C’est alors l’instant du dîner, dont elle écrit avant de se retirer: «De
par l’eau de Vals j’ai pétillé; dormait mon âme immortelle!»

Ce trait n’est-il pas charmant et bien caractéristique, oui,
caractéristique de sa vertu et de son aimable nature, un peu aussi de
son _aureæ mediocritatis_?

Une moins réservée aurait écrit: de par le champagne. L’eau de Vals lui
suffit pour pétiller; aussi ne pétille-t-elle jamais beaucoup plus
qu’une source thermale. On pétille selon ses moyens.

La porte s’ouvre, arrivent les habitués, les Janzé, les Diémer, Madame
Beulé, Mademoiselle de Lagrenée, que parfois elle paraît aimer, puis
qu’elle critique, Miss Reed et Lizzie Eikel, les Trobriand, les Coatpont
et, encore, des étrangers dont j’oublie le nom, espagnol, je crois, et
qui revient incessamment. Ceux qu’il baptise ne font pas de cadeaux, car
je ne les retrouve pas au Catalogue; mais si c’est l’époque du jour de
l’an, chacun des autres est _dona ferens_ et apporte, qui, «un délicieux
sabot pointu formant boîte» ou une «gracieuse petite marmite dorée».

Et à cela, elle n’a jamais résisté, la chattemite, ne résiste pas, ne
résistera.

On fait un _tresilio_, puis l’on se sépare. Et, avant de se confier au
sommeil, qui d’ailleurs se fait souvent prier, quand les huîtres
marinées ne figurent pas sur le menu, elle rouvre le cher confident de
ses papotages, lui apprend que des voisins de Villers, auxquels elle
croyait, viennent de se montrer au-dessous de ce qu’elle en attendait,
pour une question de lessive;--puis, elle décrit son costume vert et
lilas, en demandant à Dieu d’être meilleure.




II

LES MIRLITONS AZURÉS

        L’INVITÉE: «Baptiste, quelle est la poétesse que la Duchesse
        vient de serrer dans ses bras?

        L’ANNONCEUR: «Madame la Marquise est comme moi, nous ne
        connaissons personne aujourd’hui.»

        FORAIN.


Ayant eu l’occasion d’étudier, dans le précédent Essai, le personnage
d’une _Précieuse_ de la première moitié du dernier siècle, je me suis
demandé si un type semblable, ou seulement similaire, se pourrait
reproduire de nos jours, en tenant compte des modifications qui
résultent de l’_entourage_ et de la _mise_.--Mais n’est-ce pas déjà
beaucoup, étant donné ce que nous avons vu accomplir par ces deux
éléments combinés?

Quant à la mentalité résultant, pour Maîtresse Corbeau, de l’infatuation
due à la flagornerie des renards d’à présent, serait-il même besoin
d’insister beaucoup pour la faire reparaître? Certain «délicieux
chevalier» que nous voyons jouer un rôle de metteur en scène, dans
l’histoire du bas-bleu d’avant-hier, ne demande qu’à ressusciter (si ce
n’est déjà fait) pour organiser les «thés littéraires» où Mademoiselle
Vacaresco, bombant sous son noir, débite la Ballade Roumaine.

Il persuade aux mondaines, le chevalier, comme autrefois Caro, qu’elles
pourraient bien avoir en elles, les moyens (dirai-je: le moyeu?) d’un
Voiture. C’est lui qui les incite à éclaircir leurs crêpes, pour
déjeuner chez un tiers, avec Pierre Lafitte, et lui lâcher, au bon
moment, qu’elles ont «fait de jolis vers... hier».--Le décevant barbier,
lui, devait toujours _raser_ gratis, le lendemain... Elles, c’est
toujours la veille, qu’elles ont _rimé_, et pourtant, cela revient au
même.

Dès l’aube, elles ont apostrophé le berger de la montagne, trempé la
soupe aux herbes des champs, et leur mouchoir, des pleurs de la nuit;
puis, dans une branche du laurier d’Apollon, taillé la poutre qui doit
occuper leur œil, sans les empêcher de juger la paille des autres points
de vue. Ainsi nanties, elles se glissent aux réunions de _Fémina_, au
_Concours Sévigné_, au _Thé Conférence_. Le délicieux chevalier les
attend, à la sortie, pour les conduire au _Dîner des Poètes_, où l’on
vient de les élire. Dans l’intervalle, elles ont posé pour un
photographe de _Madame et Monsieur_, et on leur a pris une
interview.--N’est-ce pas, après tout, assez échauffant, de s’asseoir à
son bureau, devant un kodak, et d’affecter un air de Sibylle de Cumes en
invoquant la Postérité, et en composant des vers _à son édredon_?

Mais elles sont nombreuses, celles qui sortent aujourd’hui de ce
gaufrier et rien ne peut, ne doit sembler plus ordinaire. Il faudra
donc, pour que le type reprenne du relief, qu’il se greffe sur des
circonstances capables de lui assurer, avec abondance et continuité, des
développements falots et risibles.

Ces circonstances peuvent se rencontrer.

Quand notre Dame de Charité, lectrice-née d’un journal à charades et à
patrons, s’égare dans les officines d’un journal à palmes, elle y
rencontre les plus dodus encriers de la contemporaine production
féminine. Mais la quenouille, qui veut se faire aussi grosse que Madame
Bulteau, risque fort de perdre son lin, sans gagner de laine. Tout au
plus obtiendra-t-elle qu’on lui applique le titre travesti du roman de
cette éminente confrère; et, ce titre, ce sera, pour elle: _La Sueur sur
la Rime_.

                                   *

                                 *   *

Un des principaux obstacles à la réapparition, de nos jours, du type
dont je parlais plus haut, c’est, tout d’abord, et tout simplement que
_le Bas-Bleu n’existe plus_. J’ai dénoncé, ailleurs, les raisons de
cette faillite, selon moi, regrettable, si je le compare au type qui s’y
est substitué. La femme savante, même dans la mauvaise acception du mot,
ne valait-elle pas mieux, en effet, que la femme soi-disant _sincère_,
fort exactement définie par Monsieur Richepin, dans sa Préface au livre
de Monsieur Stoullig, l’autoresse «dénuée de style et de grammaire», la
poétesse «incapable de chanter quatre vers de suite se tenant», mais
très capable «de prendre une antiquaille pour une trouvaille en sa
gaucherie niaise et prétentieuse»?

J’ai moi-même ajouté quelques touches à ce portrait, dans ma réponse à
Émile Berr, à propos de l’Avenir de l’Aristocratie:

«En ce qui concerne les femmes, ces immunités vont plus loin, elles
tournent à ce que j’appellerais volontiers: l’_ovation dans l’œuf_. Une
autre que Madame de Noailles pourrait trouver mauvais de voir mettre à
son niveau, de si foudroyante façon, des Saphos si élémentaires. Elle
s’en gardera bien, puisque ce serait manquer d’esprit. Elle se
contentera d’en sourire. Il n’en est pas moins vrai que des dames
cessent brusquement de tricoter, pour délyrer, et remplacent les
aiguilles dont elles ourdissaient des coiffures pour de petits gueux,
par des calames, tressant, dressant, pour Apollon, des lauriers qui se
souviennent du casque-à-mèche.

«Ont-elles raison, ces Parques, de vouloir jouer les Muses? Elles
_brodaient au passé_; aborderont-elles à l’avenir?...

«Pour celles qui sont sincères, je conseille de se représenter l’accueil
qui serait fait à la nouvelle qu’elles ont perdu leur titre
(nobiliaire), leur fortune, leur hôtel et leur cuisinier. Peut-être
l’interview se ferait moins nombreuse, l’appareil photographique les
viserait moins, on se passerait d’elles dans les banquets et les
distributions de prix; traitements dont, au reste, elles n’auraient qu’à
se louer, s’ils communiquaient un peu d’hésitation à leur lyrisme, de
sécurité à leur syntaxe et de discrétion à leur génie.»

Ce portrait n’est pas du tout celui de la Précieuse d’avant-hier. Elle
avait beau se défendre d’être un bas-bleu, elle l’était parfaitement,
une femme savante, trop savante, à tort et à travers, j’en conviens,
mais avec, au moins, le mérite de son étude et de son effort.

Point n’était autre, cette Marguerite de Navarre à qui l’Évêque de Meaux
écrivait: «Madame, s’il y avait, au bout du monde, un docteur qui, par
un seul verbe abrégé, vous pût apprendre, de la grammaire, autant qu’il
est possible d’en savoir, et un autre, de la rhétorique, et un autre, de
la philosophie, et aussi des sept arts libéraux, chacun par un verbe
abrégé, vous y courriez comme au feu.»

Les dames dont je parle ne veulent, elles, rien apprendre que l’_Art
d’accommoder les restes_ d’Orphée, et d’en trousser un miroton,
aromatisé de laurier-sauce.

Un qui plaide pour leur cause, sans d’ailleurs y tenir beaucoup, et
plutôt pour donner satisfaction aux sentiments d’amitié qui l’unissent à
une de ces Demi-Muses, me disait récemment: «A-t-on le droit de chicaner
les gens sur les passe-temps qu’ils adoptent?»--La proposition n’est pas
soutenable. Et si les gens décident, ingénument ou non, de se moquer du
monde en lui donnant des vessies pour des lanternes, comment le monde ne
serait-il pas en droit de faire sentir aux gens qu’il n’est pas leur
dupe? Comment, en outre, cette déclaration ne serait-elle pas la
contrepartie de la joie qu’on peut et doit éprouver à honorer une
Desbordes-Valmore, dans le passé, et à vanter, dans le présent, un livre
comme _Les Huit Paradis_ par exemple?

C’est le même sophisme dont usait, avec une égale insincérité, un homme
de talent, cherchant à innocenter l’encrier de sa Dame: «Elle fait ça,
disait-il, _comme elle ferait de la tapisserie_.» Oui, la tapisserie,
c’est toujours à elle qu’il faut en revenir; mais non pour l’injurier,
comme voulait cet auteur, en la comparant à de la _cacographie_.

Beaux canevas, attendus par le point de Hongrie, espérés par le point de
Saint-Cyr, je crois plutôt vous avoir rendu justice quand j’écrivais à
une de vos anciennes fidèles, menacée de vous abandonner pour le point
d’admiration de la fausse gloire: «C’est déjà bien assez triste de ne
pas faire de la tapisserie! Une femme, selon moi, ne doit y renoncer que
si la Sapho qui est en elle,--ou qu’elle y croit,--l’emporte décidément
sur la Pénélope que, pour mon compte, je préférerai toujours!»

J’ai, pour cela, de bonnes raisons: je reçois, d’une dame Scandinave,
qui était venue voir mon palais rose, un coussin charmant; il porte
inscrit, en caractères de rubis, de grenat et de corail, de pourpre et
de sang, de feu, d’aurore et de fantaisie, le nom de ma demeure, tracé
de soies aux rougeurs diverses, laques sombres, carmins pâlis, les
premiers comme le jour quand il expire, les seconds comme le jour quand
il naît.--Oh! que ce coussin me repose! Non seulement d’être venu, des
pays du ski, servir à ma sieste; mais d’être un oreiller _auquel on ne
fait pas de vers_!... et dont l’Atropos qui le brode, m’apparaît comme
une parque d’élégance et de délicatesse, faisant justice du _Prix Vie
Heureuse_... et même du _Prix Nobel_!

Mon Zodiaque de lettres féminines est au complet. On n’y jetterait pas
une épingle,--même à tête bleue. Douze signes, douze cygnes.

J’y vois Madame EDMOND ADAM, la vaillante doyenne de nos auteuresses et
la robuste aïeule de nos politiciennes; GYP, qui est ma voisine et,
j’ose dire, mon amie; JUDITH GAUTIER, que je considère; DANIEL LESUEUR,
dont les facultés jouent avec une souple force, capable de redonner foi
en la vie; Madame ALPHONSE DAUDET, qui a un joli brin de plume aux
aiguilles de son tricot; Madame BULTEAU, qui traite ses lecteurs de
napoléonienne façon.

    Partout Lui, toujours Elle, ou brûlante, ou glacée,
    Leur image, sans cesse assiège ma pensée!...

MADAME GOYAU, dont la culture désarme et dont la bonne grâce attache;
MADAME DELARUE-MARDRUS, que j’admire et que j’aime; MADAME DE RÉGNIER,
que j’apprécie sans la connaître, et MADAME DE NOAILLES, que j’admire
sans l’aimer.

Enfin, la PRINCESSE BIBESCO, sur le seuil de ses Paradis, comme un
charmant Saint Pierre féminin dont le trousseau compte huit clefs; et
certaine montagnarde dont j’ai oublié le nom, qui fait du Théocrite dans
les Grisons, et du Lespinasse dans l’Engadine, brûle sur la glace, et
nous apparaît un peu comme une Religieuse Portugaise de la neige.

J’entends une voix me dire qu’un zodiaque féminin, dans lequel ne figure
pas Madame Séverine, a bien des chances d’être incomplet. Et comme je
suis de cet avis, je propose d’associer Madame Goyau et Madame Bulteau,
pour en confectionner de considérables _Gémeaux_. Deux têtes sous un
même bonnet, deux bienséances sur un même siège. Cela nous rendra, pour
l’auteur de _Pages Rouges_, le signe auquel il a droit, et que nous lui
offrirons de grand cœur.

Quant à la Duchesse de Rohan, elle s’est mise à _jouer aux Lettres_,
avec une puérilité enjouée dont je ne conteste pas la bégayante
bonhomie, et comme les enfants font des trous dans le sable, ou
organisent une dînette, au cours de laquelle une noix joue le rôle d’un
poulet rôti, cependant qu’une crotte de chocolat prend l’importance d’un
plum-pudding; elle malmène l’alphabet, elle tripote les mots qui
servirent à Montesquieu et à Chateaubriand, à Hugo et à Gautier (je ne
cite que ceux-là) pour construire leurs pyramides; et elle les dérange
en petits pâtés, pour ses amis et connaissances. Elle fait penser à des
écoliers brouillons et naïfs, qui auraient ouvert un médaillier, et pris
des profils laurés pour jouer au bouchon. Comme ces espiègles sont bien
gentils, on ne les gronde que juste ce qu’il faut. Seulement on leur
reprend les Césars, pour les remettre dans le médaillier... dont on ne
laisse plus traîner la clef.

                                   *

                                 *   *

«_C’est regrettable qu’il ne se soit trouvé, dans son entourage,
personne pour la décourager!_» me disait fort bien un jeune homme qui,
dans ce temps-là, ne manquait pas de clairvoyance, en me parlant d’une
de ces dames fâcheusement atteintes de ce que j’appellerais volontiers:
_l’incontinence du rythme_.

C’est bien dit, avec mesure, indulgence et sévérité.

Non, il n’a pas raison (et il le sait bien) l’ami du Quart-de-Muse,
quand il affirme qu’il ou elle a le droit de se divertir, aux dépens de
nos oreilles et de nos cœurs.

Notez d’abord que la personne prendrait elle-même fort mal, si elle en
avait vent, le plaidoyer de son défenseur, parce qu’_elle n’admet pas du
tout_ que son passe-temps soit, pour elle, un _amusement_, mais bien un
_labeur_; elle y insiste, pleurant, avec _sincérité_, les jours perdus,
par elle, pour L’ŒUVRE!--Non, il n’a pas raison, et il le sait encore
mieux, le subtil ami du d’Annunzio féminin, en affirmant que son Égérie
est en droit _de ne pas tapisser_. Quel service cette nymphe aurait-elle
rendu à Numa, si elle avait prétendu régner pour son compte, au lieu de
l’assister, dans son intérêt?

Là est la maldonne transcendante. Quand celles qu’on appelait autrefois
les Maîtresses de maison (avant l’invention de Madame Four) se seront
toutes mises à jouer du plectre, ce n’est pas chez elle qu’on ira jouer
de la fourchette. Et on n’aura pas tort: on y mangerait mal.

Non, une Maîtresse de maison ne doit pas être un d’Annunzio féminin,
mais un Mécène féminin, si elle est apte à jouer ce noble et difficile
rôle; et, si elle a le bonheur d’avoir un d’Annunzio chez elle, je lui
conseille de le prendre par la main, de le conduire vers ce qu’elle aura
de mieux à lui soumettre comme tribune ou comme cathèdre, au lieu d’y
monter elle-même et de s’y asseoir, en offrant à son public, moins
docile et moins louangeur qu’elle ne le croit (à quelques exceptions
près, prises dans l’aveuglement ou dans la flatterie) offrant, dis-je,
un spectacle assez semblable à celui du _Dormeur éveillé_, ou du
personnage qui en est l’équivalent dans le prologue de la _Mégère
Apprivoisée_.

Oui, représentez-vous qu’une simple lectrice (encore pas des meilleures
puisqu’elle s’endormira) s’endorme sur les œuvres d’un bon poète, et
qu’elle se réveille, persuadée par un songe (à moins que ce ne soit par
Monsieur du Bled, Monsieur de Bouchaud ou Monsieur Sarlovèze) qu’elle
est devenue ce poète lui-même. Vous voyez d’ici les amusants
développements, sans compter les enseignements, qu’un dramaturge
pourrait tirer de cette situation, jusqu’au réveil final, accompagné, je
le crains, de quelques nazardes.

Fallait pas qu’elle y aille!

Or, savez-vous ce qu’elle fait, en attendant la foudre, la
Demi-Muse?--Je le demandais, l’autre jour, à quelqu’un qui la fréquente,
et qui me répondit, sans que j’aie bien su démêler ce qu’il y avait de
blagueur ou de convaincu, dans cette réplique: _Elle jouit de sa
gloire!..._

Je préfère, je l’avoue, et infiniment, celle de la Dame qui,--au lieu de
chercher un Orphée dans son for intérieur, où ne se rencontre que
Morphée--regarde autour d’elle, et trouvant, hors de son âme, ce qu’elle
y poursuivait imprudemment, un _artiste vrai_, lui fait la fête et la
place qui conviennent, avec goût et avec grâce.

Mais si la Poésie est réellement en elle, et capable de s’exprimer,
combien plus grande sera la valeur de la Dame, quand elle fait, de son
plein gré, le sacrifice de ce don, lui préférant son _devoir_, qui est
d’accueillir un talent supérieur au sien, et de le célébrer, au lieu de
le contrefaire!

C’est le grand mérite de la Comtesse Greffulhe, d’avoir su comprendre
cette loi, et c’est l’hommage que j’ai tenu à honneur de lui rendre, sur
ce point, au cours du passage que je lui ai consacré dans mon Éloge de
Gustave Moreau:

«Certes! il y a quelque chose de _divin_, dans le fait de retrouver une
main, que pourraient distraire des futilités, sans cesse occupée à
exalter de nobles causes d’art; et cela, sans y mêler rien de pédant,
sans y ajouter des productions personnelles, qui en excluraient le
désintéressement; en un mot, sans rien perdre de sa grâce.»

Une autre Grande Dame, la Duchesse de Rohan, parut, un instant, aussi,
se complaire dans l’art désintéressé d’accueillir les Maîtres, de les
exalter et semblait devoir y exceller.

Je ne sais ce qui l’en a détournée; une simple distraction, je veux
l’espérer, et qui ne se prolongera pas, je veux le croire.

                                   *

                                 *   *

Un mien ami qui se fait un malin plaisir de me mystifier, m’apporte,
parfois, de soi-disant vers de poétesses à la mode. Je le soupçonne de
les fabriquer à mon usage, ces vers; mais comme il réussit à m’égayer,
je n’approfondis pas, et me laisse bercer par cette Érato incohérente.
Voilà sa dernière cueillette, dont je lui laisse la responsabilité:

    J’aime à me promener sur les bords de la Seine,
    Sur la berge fleurie ou sur le Cours-la-Reine...

Ceci, mon ami le chante sur un air de Café-Concert, avec lequel le
distique s’accorde, à vrai dire, assez bien.

Mais ce n’est qu’une entrée de jeu. Voici maintenant une veillée
mortuaire, dans une maison de paysans.

          Le cheval et la vache,
          Compagnons des labeurs,
          Veillaient après leur tâche,
          Tout près, _comme les sœurs_.

Mon ami trouve le dernier vers irrévérencieux pour les nonnes.

De prime-abord, cette critique peut paraître avoir raison. Mais, en y
regardant mieux, ne serait-ce pas le cas d’évoquer cette fameuse
sincérité dont parle Richepin, et de rappeler ces tableaux de primitifs,
en lesquels, dans le voisinage d’une crèche, on voit fumer des mufles et
renifler des naseaux, non loin de la touchante humanité des bergers et
des rustres?

On voit que mon ami exagère.

Le vrai, c’est que ces dames-maçonnes (ou qui auraient pu l’être), dans
leur empressement à construire un monument rival de celui d’_Horace_, en
oublient un peu trop la simple construction grammaticale. Il n’est que
trop certain, que celle qui s’écrie, dans un bel élan:

    J’étais sur le balcon, près de Louis de France[9];
    Il était à cheval...

donne à entendre, incontestablement, que ce balcon est de proportions
assez inusitées, puisqu’il supporte un cavalier avec sa monture. Or, il
n’en est rien; en réalité, la Dame est sur le balcon de Monsieur de
Nolhac, et à quelques mètres de la statue équestre de Louis XIV.
Seulement, cela, notre poétesse le sait si bien, qu’elle oublie de le
dire, sans s’apercevoir qu’elle dit tout autre chose, et d’assez
comique, ma foi! Heureusement que:

    Le célèbre Nolhac, l’érudit de sa race...

est là pour tout remettre en place: la dame, chez Vaugelas, le Soleil,
sur son socle, avec son coursier, et se voit récompensé de son
hospitalité, non moins que de ses soins, par ce bel hexamètre qu’on ne
lui envoie pas dire.

  [9] Cet auteur se plaît fort à faire apparaître nos grands rois dans
    ses petites machines. «Henri IV a passé... une branche a cassé...»
    sans autre raison que de fournir une rime, et la provision de
    chevilles nécessaires à l’établissement de la chose.

    J’ai pour amie une femme d’esprit qui, non seulement découpe et
    collectionne les strophes de cette poétesse, _mais les fait
    encadrer_. Après tout, l’encadrement c’est une _distinction_, quels
    qu’en puissent être les motifs. Tout le monde ne l’obtient pas. Mon
    amie aime mes vers, elle ne les fait pas encadrer.

Ce qui suit, mon ami l’admire, et il a raison. Il s’agit d’un caniche au
poil _jamais taillé trop court_.

Le citateur affirme, et je suis de son avis, que rien ne donne la
sensation de l’_infaillibilité_, comme ce _jamais_ appliqué à la tonte.
Les années, elles-mêmes, peuvent être d’inégale durée, bissextiles, en
un mot; les tondeurs d’hommes peuvent, une fois par hasard, émonder,
d’un ciseau distrait, une boucle d’Alcibiade ou d’Antinoüs, de d’Orsay
ou de Brummel; seul, le merlan de _Petto_ (c’est, paraît-il, le nom du
caniche, sans cesse égal à lui-même) réussit à faire se rencontrer, dans
la frisure d’un toutou, le tranchant d’Atropos et la ponctualité de
Saturne. Les queues des comètes pourront bien être rasées de trop près;
jamais celle du symbole de fidélité, qui associe en lui la mesure du
sentiment et la régularité de la fourrure.

Quelques personnes, feuilletant le même volume (à vrai dire, je ne sais
plus bien lequel, mais peu importe) blâment la hardiesse de certaine
apostrophe au vice-président de la Société Artistique des Amateurs,
l’honorable Monsieur Fournier, que l’auteur interpelle, en lui demandant
si, quelque jour d’orage, dans un petit trou pas cher, il ne se serait
pas, par hasard, senti:

    Le sel à pleine lèvre, auprès d’un cormoran?

A vrai dire, on se représente difficilement à pareille fête, le
sympathique père du sympathique Maire de Compiègne, debout, dans sa
tenue correcte, aux côtés de l’oiseau pêcheur, faisant claquer son bec
et gonflant son col, où se débattent sardines et maquereaux, rougets et
limandes!

Mais la Poésie a de ces audaces. J’ai gardé pour la fin celle qui me
paraît, entre toutes, mériter ce titre.

    L’étoile, dans la nuit, guide l’homme, vers l’anse...

fait un vers devenu célèbre, emprunté aux «fugitives» d’une grande Dame
dont, entre nous, j’ignore le nom, _que je préfère ne pas savoir_.
_L’Œuvre_ suffit.

J’entends dire que Sem projette d’illustrer cet étonnant alexandrin.
Voici comment il interprète la scène: un décor de profondes ténèbres,
parmi lesquelles, bras étendus, s’avance, en tâtonnant, un personnage
dans le simple appareil dit pan de chemise. Au-dessus, une étoile à cinq
branches, l’étoile en papier d’argent des Rois Mages, décoche un rayon
sur l’huis entr’ouvert d’une table nocturne, laquelle laisse s’arrondir
hors d’elle-même, pourvue d’un éclat blanc par l’astre démonstratif,
l’oreille du vaisseau ardemment évoqué par la confidence du pèlerin
noctambule. (Ouf!)

Et, pour plus de sécurité en même temps que d’autorité, le quatrain est
dédié à un ministre _plénipotentiaire_. J’ai nommé Monsieur Paléologue.

Est-ce en mémoire de ces citations, qu’un autre de nos amis (celui-là
«un tout petit peu méchant» comme disait, de lui, une auteuresse) avait
terminé, par cet hexamètre, le portrait d’une poétesse un peu trop
pressée d’arriver:

    «Et son désir d’écrire est un petit besoin»?

                                   *

                                 *   *

La cause de ces désorientations, sinon de ces désordres[10], réside et
se résume tout entière dans ce distique cité par Rivarol:

    Le charme de leurs vers sublimes et parfaits
    M’inspire la fureur d’en forger de mauvais.

  [10] L’enrôlement spontané, dans le bataillon des _écrivaines_, de
    dames qui n’ont aucune vocation pour cet art et aucune aptitude pour
    ce métier.

On commence par réciter le _Mouflon_ du Vicomte de Guerne; mais, à ce
jeu, le désir d’y aller de son Mouflon personnel ne tarde pas à naître;
et le premier mouflon se fait sans qu’on y pense.

Estimez-vous heureux, si le mouflon n’est pas bicéphale, comme le mouton
récemment mis au jour par une de ces éleveuses de Salon, au cours d’un
poème (?) qui m’apparaît tel qu’un _Roi des Aulnes_ de la tératologie.

    Et l’on n’en vit jamais d’aussi maigre à la foire.

C’est la bergère elle-même qui l’avoue, en nous décrivant son agneau
phénomène.

Ma foi, pendant que nous y sommes, pourquoi ne pas appliquer, à ce
Roi-des-Aulnes là, ce qui reste de ce vers auto-justicier?

    Et l’on n’en vit jamais d’aussi maigre... dans Schubert.

L’ardeur de créer ce qu’on _croit être_ un _Salon Littéraire_ s’en mêle,
et les petits succès de vanité qu’on y remporte, devant un public de
complaisance, transforment en une insatiable _pituite de vanité_, ce qui
n’avait d’abord été qu’un _apéritif de gloriole_.

Autre éleveuse:

En voici une qui a le toupet de déranger un grand journal (un peu bien
condescendant, ce me semble) pour lui publier des sornettes de ce
calibre. Elle se promène au milieu de ses bêtes dont elle se proclame
reine (Ce n’est pas moi qui le dis). Et elle énumère ses sujets:

          Écureuil est mon page,
          Lapin, mon écuyer.
          . . . . . . . . . .
          Et toi, chat qui sommeilles,
          Sois mon Prince Régent.

Voyons, n’en conviendrez-vous pas avec moi, plutôt que d’écrire ces
bêtises et de les faire imprimer, est-ce que Clotho ne ferait pas mieux
de coudre une brassière?

Vous me direz peut-être, avec l’Ami des Femmes Savantes, dont je parlais
tout à l’heure, que le mal n’est pas bien grand et que Banville se
contentait de tenir Bélise pour «une pauvre insensée presque
attendrissante».

Tout d’abord, si j’étais, moi, l’ami de Bélise, _je ne voudrais pas pour
elle de ce compliment-là_. Je me permets d’ajouter ensuite que je crois
préférable de ne pas confondre les _fugitives_ avec les _fuites_, et de
ne pas s’en aller mirlitonnant, comme cet autre barytonnait.

C’est le moyen de parler comme Monsieur de Krüdner; et le moyen n’est
pas enviable.

Quant à l’auditoire de ces hôtels de Ramponneau, l’éclectisme avec
lequel il est recruté apparaîtra suffisamment dans l’anecdote suivante.

Un jour que j’avais fait réciter, devant une de ces _Madame Muse_, un
poème de Pierre Dupont, j’eus l’étonnement d’entendre qu’elle me disait:
«Il était, l’autre jour, chez moi.»

Et comme je faisais observer, à ma gracieuse interlocutrice, que
l’auteur des _Bœufs_ ne pouvait, quelque désir que pût en éprouver son
ombre, avoir quitté son mausolée pour entendre réciter _le Mouflon_,
même dans un salon _select_, je dus me contenter de cette réponse: _En
tout cas, c’est un nom qui ressemble bien à ça._

                                   *

                                 *   *

Il existe cependant un public autre que celui de ces petits endroits,
desquels il est assez naturel, après tout, que les habitués
applaudissent au «tarte-à-la-crême» d’une Dame qui leur en offre leur
part. Mais cet autre public, lui aussi, n’est pas insensible à certaine
forme de _snobisme_, dans l’inférieure acception de ce mot, lequel peut
en avoir une _supérieure_, quand il signifie: _désir de s’honorer en
fréquentant de véritables grandeurs_.

Quoi qu’on en puisse dire, les publics ressemblent, de plus en plus, à
ces dîneurs sans appétit, qui négligent la pièce de résistance, pour ne
chipoter que la garniture et la quenelle.

La démonstration en fut encore récemment faite par une anecdote que je
veux conter, je m’empresse d’ajouter: sous toutes réserves, parce
qu’elle est due à la source dont j’ai parlé, à l’apport d’un ami
aimable, mais inventif, peut-être bien capable d’avoir fabriqué l’ana,
pour le besoin de la cause.

On prétend qu’un éditeur sérieux ayant projeté, même, en partie,
réalisé, une réimpression des PENSÉES DE PASCAL, laquelle lui
occasionnait de grands frais, qui devaient se couvrir par la
souscription, s’attrista de voir celle-ci ne pas donner ce qu’il en
attendait, mais au contraire, s’attarder et bouder avec une paresse
humiliante pour le sentiment contemporain et la mentalité française.

Comme il exprimait sa déconvenue, devant un groupe d’amis qu’il
consultait sur le meilleur moyen de remédier à ce marasme, l’un d’eux
parut réfléchir profondément; puis, tout à coup, avec la flamme que dut
avoir, dans les yeux, l’homme qui clama: «Mouillez les cordes!» au
moment où l’obélisque allait retomber, ce nouveau sauveteur, lui,
s’écria: «OBTENEZ UNE PRÉFACE DE LA DUCHESSE DE ROHAN!»

                                   *

                                 *   *

Je n’aurais pas demandé mieux que de finir sur ce trait, à la fois
profond et badin, beaucoup moins préoccupé de décocher une malice
personnelle, trop joyeuse pour n’être pas elle-même désarmée, que de
rechercher une vérité générale; mais quelques réflexions me sont encore
apparues sur le propos, et je préfère les consigner ici, dans l’espoir
de n’y pas revenir. Car il ne me plaît pas qu’on imagine que je veuille
prolonger ce débat. Le sujet m’a paru _plaisant_ et _opportun_. Je
l’avais abordé incidemment dans un autre article. Aujourd’hui, je
l’accoste avec plus de netteté; mais, je le répète, pour l’épuiser, en
ce qui me concerne.

Un de nos Maîtres a écrit que «le _génie_ est une _patience_». Il
faudrait dire de même que l’_Art_ est, avant tout, un _métier_, ou du
moins ne peut s’en passer. La Duchesse de Verluise serait très étonnée,
et fort mécontente, en un mot, se jugerait impudemment mystifiée si,
cherchant un cuisinier, on lui en offrait un qui jusque-là, titulaire
d’autres fonctions et seulement, la veille, charmé des jeux de couleurs
offerts par le mélange de la tomate et de l’omelette, aurait décidé de
se consacrer à l’art de Vatel, sans autre garantie, pour les convives,
que la subite passion de cet ancien cocher pour les œufs battus et la
crème fouettée.

La bonne Dame ne s’aperçoit pas que c’est pourtant ce qu’elle fait
elle-même avec les cordes de la lyre, dont elle nous sert les débris,
sous forme de boyaux de chats, qui se souviennent du miaulement de leurs
ancêtres.

Laissez les enfants à leurs mères, laissez les roses aux rosiers,
laissez les duchesses à leurs métiers, qui sont des métiers à
tapisserie!

Ah! _la tapisserie! la tapisserie!_ on dira que j’en radote, ça m’est
bien égal. D’abord parce que ce sera vrai, et que je m’applique à ne pas
être de ceux que la vérité choque. Savez-vous, Mesdames, que Louis XV y
travaillait avec passion? Sinon, je me forge un plaisir de vous
l’apprendre, dans l’espoir, d’ailleurs vain, de vous réconcilier avec
elle. N’importe! Apprenez qu’il faisait crever des postiers, sur le
chemin de Versailles, afin d’aller lui quérir, à Paris, l’écheveau dont
il avait besoin pour terminer un fond, ou compléter une fleurette?--Et
si ce détail ne suffit pas pour vous rendre au canevas qui vous attend,
que vous faut-il?--Une statue? Eh bien, je veux qu’on la vote, et
qu’elle soit la plus charmante du monde, avec son air recueilli, son
front penché sur l’aiguille au chas oblong, sur la souple aiguillée et
le réseau symétrique du tissu ajouré, qui ressemble aux alvéoles d’un
candide rayon, prêt à se remplir agréablement du miel coloré des soies.

Oui, une statue, dans le passé, à la Comtesse Mathilde, et dans le
présent, à Madame Delessert, à la Princesse de Beauvau, les deux
dernières qui, parmi nous, aient porté haut et beau la fidélité aux arts
délicieux des Parques de salon, les Dames filandières.

Revenons à la Duchesse de Rohan. Ce qui caractérise son art (?) c’est
_l’audace_. L’autre jour, elle se représentait occupée à faire des
achats, dans de Grands Magasins. Le bon Coppée eût approuvé le choix du
sujet; aurait-il (ce n’est pas certain) sanctionné la témérité de
l’image qui met en scène la cliente de feu Boucicaut et de feu
Chauchard, et la fait

    Acheter de la soie et de longs _fils de laine_?

Un autre aurait écrit: de longs _brins_ de laine. En effet, un brin
peut-être plus ou moins ténu, mais garde le droit d’être aussi long que
possible. Notre éminente acheteuse fait bon marché (c’est le cas de le
dire) des scrupules dont s’embarrassent encore l’entêtement du rhéteur
et l’hésitation du grammairien. Aujourd’hui elle nous dévide des fils de
laine; demain nous lui devrons de la laine de fil; après avoir
bouleversé les rayons d’Hélios, elle chambarde les «rayons» d’Hériot, et
je donnerais volontiers, pour épigraphe à la pièce, le vieux calembour,
autrefois inspiré par un roi de Grèce, dont on avait dit: «Il faut
qu’Othon soit philhéllène.»

C’est égal, je n’en tiens pas moins pour un heureux symptôme, le retour
de la dame, aux broderies de ses aïeules. Puissent les fils de laine,
vraiment dignes d’un magasin de _nouveautés_, la rattacher à un _métier_
qui, désormais ne soit plus celui de Lamartine retouché par La Palisse,
ou de Musset revu par Boquillon!

                                   *

                                 *   *

Sortant, un jour, d’une de ces matinées, dont certains invités
commencent par écrire à la patronne, pour solliciter d’elle la redingote
qui leur permette de se produire, une dame que nous appellerons Édith,
et dont l’avis, en ce temps-là, ne me semblait pas négligeable, me
saisit de cette conclusion discutable, déjà. «Comment ne pas tenir pour
une flatterie, à notre égard, le fait qu’_ayant tout_, elles veulent
encore _ce qui nous appartient_, le bel art d’écrire?»--Édith, je ne
suis pas de votre avis; et bien au fond, pas non plus vous-même. Jamais
le _distinguo_ ne fut plus nécessaire; jamais le «soyez plutôt maçon» de
l’honnête Boileau, ne résonna d’un plus urgent rappel; jamais la qualité
de la vocation ne dut être plus scrupuleusement interrogée qu’à l’heure
où Thersite se prend pour Tityre et pour Tyrtée, sans omettre Walter, ni
même Beckmesser qui a, du moins, pour lui, la supériorité de sa passion
pour la tablature.

Pendant que je suis en train de dire Thersite, j’ajouterais fort bien
THERSITIE. Si j’affirme qu’ils se tiennent tous deux pour Tircis et pour
Tiresias, c’est sous-entendre que je ne doute pas de leur bonne foi.
Pour cela on peut les plaindre autant et, si vous y tenez, plus que les
blâmer. _Le blâme est pour ceux qui les abusent._ «Si vous assistiez à
l’arrivée du courrier de THERSITIE, m’assurait quelqu’un, vous
comprendriez qu’elle soit leurrée; des noms sérieux, ou que, jusqu’à ce
jour, on crut tels, signent pour elle des protestations qui la déçoivent
et _consomment sa perte_.»

Quoi d’étonnant alors, qu’elle se méprenne sur l’intention de ses SEULS
VRAIS AMIS, ceux qui, par de légères piqûres, essaient de dégonfler son
illusion et de la rendre aux _doux devoirs où elle excellait_. Mais elle
n’en veut plus entendre parler! La voilà en cothurne et en péplum, la
bouche en O, à nous fournir une incroyable épreuve de Suétone moderne,
de César de Salon, LE NÉRON DU FÉMINISME!

Je lisais dernièrement un curieux plaidoyer en faveur de Néron, dont
l’auteur prétendait que ce Prince fut sincère, en _la croyance à sa
vocation d’art_. C’est en cela que THERSITIE lui ressemble. Admettez (à
Dieu ne plaise! nous ne voulons pas la mort, je ne dis pas de la
pécheresse, elle n’est que fautive, mais de la _pêcheuse de bravos_)
admettons qu’un feu de cheminée (la _cheminée_ est une grande
responsable dans ces affaires de déclamation salonnière) admettez qu’un
feu de cheminée fasse justice de tout ce faux semblant et, non content
de _roussir_ une bandelette indue, aille jusqu’à vouloir _griller_ notre
Néronnette; il est possible que, dans une dernière contorsion buccale,
applaudie par Mademoiselle Vacaresco, elle pousse la clameur suprême du
grand histrion Romain: _Qualis artifex pereo!_

C’est une figure à fixer, pour le théâtre contemporain et universel, que
le personnage de THERSITIE. Philaminthe d’Escarbagnas, trônant sur un
_Monde où l’on s’ennuie_ dont le Bellac serait Monsieur
Fournier-Sarlovèze. Car, il faut en convenir, c’est cet aimable homme
qui a tout perdu. Tout cela pour faire rimer _Greffulhe_ avec
_libellule_, sur la fin d’un dîner auquel, remarquez-le bien, se donne
grandement de garde d’assister la belle Comtesse.

Je serais surpris que Monsieur Hermant, qui pourrait le réaliser avec
tant de force et de finesse, ne se laissât pas séduire par un tel sujet,
à la fois mondain et social, si propre à mettre en valeur ses qualités
de dialogue et d’observation, de courtoisie et de satire.

Si je ne parle pas de Monsieur Bataille, pour cet accomplissement, c’est
que la matière, uniquement plaisante, ne me semble pas réserver de place
pour le pathétique poignant auquel cet écrivain excelle. Mais un tel
esprit a tous les registres, et son perpétuel renouvellement, à chacune
de ses manifestations, pourrait bien nous le faire apparaître, un jour,
tel qu’un Aristophane amer, élégamment tempéré par un Archiloque
sympathique. Enfin, quand je relis _Ces Messieurs du Tiers_, de Monsieur
Claude Berton, je songe à la belle pièce qui s’est émiettée dans ce
volume, et que ce jeune auteur nous rendra, sous d’autres aspects,
refondue et remaniée.

                                   *

                                 *   *

Revenons à THERSITIE. Je le répète, elle méconnaît ses _seuls vrais
amis, ceux qui la réveillent_. «Il est jaloux de mon _salon
littéraire_!» aurait-elle dit, de l’un d’eux.--Détrompez-vous, bonne
Madame, votre Salon, tant que vous ne cesserez pas d’y mettre en avant
votre mirliton bleu, ne méritera de s’appeler que le GUIGNOL DES
MUSES.--«Au reste, ajouta celui qui nous rapportait le propos, THERSITIE
ne demanderait qu’à s’égayer elle-même des chiquenaudes que lui valent
ses vers, plus ou moins luisants, mais elle a, paraît-il, une bru qui
prend mal la chose.»--«Çà, c’est une belle démonstration de l’esprit de
famille, à l’usage de ceux qui prétendent qu’il n’existe plus», répliqua
Timon qui passait par là. Et il conclut, non sans gravité: «En tout cas,
cela prouve surabondamment, n’est-ce pas? que cette jeune Dame _aime
mieux sa belle-mère que la littérature_.»

Ce n’est pas sans plaisir que j’ai retrouvé en tête d’une liste
d’_invités_, qu’il couronnait, ma foi! fort ducalement, le nom de
certaine Dame du Corbeau, qui s’était laissé persuader par des renards à
deux pattes, à force de naïveté de sa part et, de l’autre, à force de
flagorneries, de faire un sort à son blanc fromage de lettres, dans le
groupe des récitants et même des débitants, de façon à la fois médiocre
et tapageuse. Si ce _rétablissement_ est sérieux (car il s’agissait bien
là d’une _indisposition_) et que la ci-devant Muse le doive à des
critiques sagement inspirées, je le répète, elle fera bien de tenir pour
ses _vrais amis_ ceux qui les lui ont adressées, et de placer au rang
des _suspects_, ceux auxquels elle devra le mauvais souvenir
(heureusement vite oublié) de son échauffourée lyrique.

                                   *

                                 *   *

J’entends dire que les Auteuresses de la _Vie Heureuse_ projettent
d’élire, pour leur Présidente, la Duchesse de Rohan. Non seulement une
telle circonstance ne me trouve ni dénigrant, ni hostile, mais je lui
sais gré de me fournir une occasion de préciser avec netteté le
_distinguo_ dont j’ai parlé.

C’est une chose charmante que de voir une aimable Grande Dame à la tête
d’un groupe de nobles travailleuses (je parle pour celles-là). S’il s’en
trouve parmi elles (je le crains) qui feraient bien de retourner à
l’aiguille, qu’elles n’hésitent pas! Cette agile compagne, momentanément
délaissée par elles, au nom des tropes épointés et du lyrisme décousu,
leur piquera peut-être le bout du doigt, pour se venger du porte-plume,
mais ce sera tout bénéfice pour nos repenties, quand, la saison d’après,
au lieu de déconsidérer leur écritoire par la ponte d’un nouveau roman
informe et infirme, détaillé par Monsieur Ballot, elles honoreront leur
corbeille à ouvrage par l’éclosion d’un sachet bien odorant, ou d’un
coussin bien fleuri dont je ferai l’éloge, pour les dédommager.

C’est aussi, de la part de ces laborieuses, un geste intelligent que
celui qui leur fait mettre à leur tête celle qu’elles jugent justement
haut placée par la naissance et par le cœur. Cela prouve qu’elles ne
font pas uniquement cas du _mérite d’art_. La _distinction sociale_ leur
paraît aussi avoir son prix. Je leur donne raison, _à une condition_,
c’est que les démarcations soient nettement établies et que ces
ouvrières commencent par dire à leur affable Présidente, non pas:
«Grande Dame, cesse de vaincre!» mais bien plutôt: _Cesse d’être vaincue
à la bataille des mots et des rythmes!_ en un mot: «CESSE D’ÉCRIRE!»

La Duchesse d’Uzès préside comme cela, je crois bien, certaine
association de dames peintres et sculpteurs, sans compter un cercle de
femmes. Je ne connais pas les sculptures de la Duchesse d’Uzès. Si elles
sont bonnes, la Présidente fait très bien de les exposer. Dans le cas
contraire, elle donnerait un meilleur exemple en s’abstenant[11].

  [11] Depuis, la même dame s’est mise, elle aussi, à faire des
    Conférences, mais avec _sonneries de trompe_. Duchesse et Cor de
    Chasse; voilà un chant alterné, qui ne manque ni de piquant ni de
    piqueurs.

On sait la magnifique notoriété que s’est acquise la Comtesse Greffulhe
comme Présidente d’auditions musicales.

Je ne sache pas que cette Société célèbre nous ait jamais invités à
entendre des opéras de la belle Comtesse. Je ne le regrette ni pour
elle, ni pour nous, bien persuadé, au contraire, que l’incontestable
autorité de sa présidence, vient de ce qu’elle s’est sagement abstenue
de la compromettre par la recherche de succès personnels, sur un terrain
qui n’était pas le sien.

                                   *

                                 *   *

Une chose que j’en suis encore à me demander, c’est si les propos, quand
ils nous reviennent défigurés et détournés de leur sens, le sont par une
mauvaise foi initiale de ceux qui les ont proférés ou par les
rapporteurs. Voici, par exemple, la Comtesse Norbert de Fitz-Rabbin,
laquelle, de sa voix de canard mégalomane, aurait dit, de Timon: «Voilà
deux ans que je ne le connais plus.»--Mis au courant de cette parole,
celui-ci répliqua: «Ce n’est pas mal, pour un _canard_ hébreu et
allemand; mais enfin, c’est un canard tout de même et, par suite, une
erreur; vu que, si la Dame avait bien voulu parler franc, elle se serait
contentée de dire: _Voilà dix ans qu’Il ne me connaît plus_!»

Décidément, il y a tout lieu de le craindre, la sincérité ne s’est pas
réfugiée dans toutes ces _boîtes à thé_ que sont devenus les salons
d’autrefois. En voici une dernière preuve.

Nul n’ignore que, depuis un certain temps, des Messieurs et des Dames du
meilleur monde, les uns désargentés, les autres besogneuses, se sont
improvisés reporters et, à peine dans le tympan le dernier hémistiche de
Tirésie ou de Tircythère, de Tityrette ou de Tyrtéa, s’en vont fournir,
aux grands quotidiens haletants, le nom des privilégiés que vient de
charmer l’asclépiade estropié ou le phaleuque pauvre.

Mais voici ce que je suis avide de dénoncer et dont je suis surpris que
_la vindicte des innommés_ (on pourrait l’appeler ainsi) n’ait pas fait
justice: chacun de ces Messieurs, chacune de ces Dames folliculaires,
obéissant à de personnelles prédilections, ou à ses propres antipathies,
omet volontairement dans sa nomenclature, l’élégante qu’il ou elle veut
humilier, l’homme d’esprit qui leur porte ombrage. Il en résulte que
chacun des comptes rendus de la même réunion relate des noms différents,
ce qui déroute la province, et quand je dis la province, je n’excepte
pas Paris lui-même. Hormis la Comtesse Edmond de Pourtalès, qui n’a que
des amis dans le journalisme du monde (si j’en juge par ce fait que son
nom continue à inaugurer la liste de _tous les assistants_, de _toutes
les assistances_, _partout_ et _toujours_, même quand la Dame est
retenue au temple ou au foyer, au rouet ou à la prière) aucun autre nom
ne peut être sûr d’échapper au crible du Vicomte d’Eaque, devenu
gazetier, ou du Baron de Minos, fait courriériste, sauf, bien entendu,
deux autres noms, lesquels ne sont pas moins sympathiques, je m’empresse
de l’ajouter, que fondamentaux, mais qui finiraient par donner à croire
aux étrangers et aux indigènes, que Messieurs Fournier-Sarlovèze et Becq
de Fouquières (ne pas confondre avec l’auteur des CORBEAUX),
représentent à eux seuls, toute l’élégance de Paris, tout son esprit,
toute son aristocratie.

Ce serait exagéré. C’est _beaucoup_, mais ce n’est pas _tout_.

                                   *

                                 *   *

En guise de conclusion, lisez ce passage de la _Corbeille des Roses_ de
Monsieur Jean de Bonnefon, page 109:

«La Duchesse de Rohan fait des vers qui boitent non d’un pied, mais «de
l’un et l’autre côté» comme dans la Bible.--Cette Dame est utile; elle
résume la nullité artistique d’une société qui l’admire. Pour signer
d’un si grand nom des choses aussi insignifiantes, sans soulever de
colères, il faut appartenir à un groupe frappé de mort.--La décadence
est plus belle que la jeunesse. Mais la littérature de Madame de Rohan
n’appartient pas à la décadence. Pour descendre, il faut avoir atteint
un sommet. Ce qui manque précisément dans la poésie (?) de cette femme
racée, c’est la race. L’effort d’une servante en retraite qui ne saurait
pas le français serait en tout semblable aux produits littéraires de
cette duchesse...»

Inscrivez, en regard, cette citation de presse:

«Une candidature intéressante à la Société des Gens de Lettres, celle de
Madame la Duchesse de Rohan, qui est présentée par Messieurs Paul
Hervieu et Jean Richepin, de l’Académie française.»

Qu’est-ce que cela prouve?

Premièrement, cela prouve, si la première de ces opinions n’a pas tort,
une vérité bien connue, mais qui n’avait jamais reçu de démonstration
aussi évidente, à savoir que _la plus faible apparence de talent_ n’est,
_en aucune façon_, requise pour faire partie d’une Société Littéraire.
Au reste, à quoi serviraient les _distinctions_, si ce n’est précisément
à consoler de ne pas avoir de talent, ceux et celles qui ne demandent à
la soi-disant pratique d’un art, que de les mettre en vedette. Le talent
n’est pas pour les _vaniteux_, mais pour les _orgueilleux_, il _suffit
seul_.

Deuxièmement, cela prouve que des hommes, il semblerait, entre tous,
marqués pour maintenir les traditions et faire respecter le langage,
acceptent de patronner publiquement des sujets entièrement dénués des
qualités techniques, lesquelles désignent à la sollicitude d’un tel
protectorat. Or, dans un portrait du premier de ces deux immortels, je
vois mentionné ce trait de son caractère: «Une _indulgence_ qui prend
soin de n’être jamais _complaisante_.» Voilà un _jamais_ qui vient de
rencontrer une _exception_.

Mais ce n’est pas la seule, l’éminent co-parrain en fournit une pour
faire la paire, et une qui ne craint pas d’aller jusqu’à la plus
flagrante contradiction. Relisez plus haut le passage que j’ai cité,
d’une préface où il est parlé de l’autoresse _dénuée de style et de
grammaire_, de la poétesse _incapable de chanter quatre vers de suite se
tenant_, mais très capable _de prendre une antiquaille pour une
trouvaille, en sa niaiserie gauche et prétentieuse_.

Qui donc a écrit ce morceau judicieux, capital et cinglant, si bien fait
pour donner satisfaction aux esprits «affamés de justice»?

Eh bien! mais, précisément, Monsieur Richepin lui-même!

Logique! logique! Ce sont bien là de tes coups!--Concession! Concession!
Ce sont bien là de tes crimes!

La Duchesse de Rohan sera de l’Académie.

                                   *

                                 *   *

Est-ce pour ne pas mentir à ces hautes ambitions exaltées pour elle, que
le talent (préférez-vous l’art?...) de la Duchesse de Rohan vient de se
transformer, en cinq sec? Adieu les gentils coqs-à-l’âne d’hier, si
réjouissants dans leur bonhomie naïve! L’allumeuse de _Lucioles_ s’est
mise à pondre, comme les oiseaux qu’elle a si allègrement chantés,

        «Pondez, pondez, poules de Pâques
        Et pondez-nous de jolis œufs!
        Au bazar de la Tour Saint-Jacques[12]
        On les vendra dix sous pour deux...»

s’est mise, dis-je, à pondre (et, cela, dans la propre chaire--_horresco
referens_--dans la personnelle cathèdre de Madame Bulteau, qui doit la
trouver mauvaise,)--de gros morceaux de prose hirsute et de _pathos_
pontifiant. Plus rien du crû de l’Oust, ni du clos du Deffé. On dirait
du Bouchaud débouché, démarqué, tarabiscoté, même _vacarescoté_, ce qui
est pire. On ne m’ôtera pas de l’idée que cette Mademoiselle Cormon de
la Littérature, a dû promener ses tropes sur l’écritoire de la
Philaminthe Celte. Vrai, c’est aussi _rasoir_ que ça!

  [12] Charmant euphémisme pour dire «Bazar de l’Hôtel de Ville», sans
    être accusé de faire la réclame au profit d’une maison; seulement
    voilà, cela crée des passe-droits. La dame va brouiller les
    monuments. Par bonheur, elle ne saurait manquer d’écrire quelque
    chose sur Séville, avant qu’il soit longtemps. Alors, selon toute
    vraisemblance, l’Hôtel de Ville reprendra ses droits. Mais
    peut-être, les prix auront augmenté.

Et, de bout en bout, plus le moindre petit mot pour rire (si ce n’est
_en bloc_). La bonne Dame, qui n’avait jamais lu que Botrel, vous cite
Homère, gros comme le bras de Madame de Montgomery. Est-elle donc allée
à l’école chez Monsieur du Bled?--Quoi qu’il en soit, adieu tout
l’arriéré de bonne franquette prosodique! On se prend à le regretter, en
face de cette pédagogie mal assimilée et de ce pédantisme cousu de fil
blanc, qui semblent prétendre à «river des clous» si ce n’est à «boucher
des coins» (sans le moins du monde y réussir) et qui ne décrochent que
cette timbale, laquelle est à la portée de toutes les principautés, et
qui est d’émerveiller Monsieur Sarlovèze.

Et pourtant si! le petit mot pour rire, je l’ai repêché dans ce solennel
fatras; c’est quand la narratrice (qui, j’aime à le conclure, ne se
prend pas trop au sérieux) se voit, sur je ne sais plus quelle
frontière, contester sa personnalité ducale (voilà ce que c’est que de
patoiser!) par une douanière qui se représentait sans doute autrement
les tempes ceintes de couronnes fermées.

    «Oh! que ce _quoi qu’on die_ est, pour moi, plein de charmes!

Oui, quoi qu’on die, je la retrouve là, notre aimable hôtesse d’avant la
fatale crue des grandes encres; dépouillée de toutes ces bandelettes
roumaines qui ne sont que des bandeaux de Colin-Maillard, reprise aux
enchantements d’Alcanter de Brahm, elle m’apparaît prête à repiger le
droit d’aînesse de sa vieille gaîté, échappée, par miracle et grâces à
Dieu, d’entre les féculents de Madame de Baye.

Hélas! vain espoir, éclaircie d’un instant! Adieu paniers, vendanges
sont faites, des métaphores sans suite et des bouts rimés sans queue ni
tête. Adieu corbeilles à papiers, débordantes de _cuirs_ saugrenus et de
joyeux _lapsus_! On nous a joué le tour de rentrer tout ça, qui
heureusement ne s’absente pas sans laisser d’adresse. C’est aux soins
obligeants de Lemice-Terrieux, baie des Lestrygons, dans l’_Odyssée_!

Encore un mot.

On se souviendra peut-être que je me suis demandé s’il était toujours
temps de rendre à la Grande Dame, si malencontreusement transformée en
petite muse, le service de restituer la seconde à la première, au point
de ne plus entendre parler de celle-ci; et qu’un interlocuteur m’avait
répondu: «Il est trop tard.»

--Était-il réellement trop tard?

Peut-on supposer que la rimeuse éolienne ait eu connaissance de
certaines petites mercuriales, et, plus ou moins consciente du service
que, _sincèrement_, elles voulaient lui rendre et quoi qu’en puissent
penser ceux qui ne voient pas plus loin que le bout de leur encensoir,
n’en ait pas moins fait son profit? Il est sûr que la composition paraît
s’étancher, la récitation, se résorber. De temps à autre, de loin en
loin, les clients des thés poétiques, terrifiés de se voir reprendre
leur verseuse ducale, exaltent bien encore le débit acclamé d’une
sornette philosophique; tout de même les rechutes sont moins fréquentes,
il y a du mieux.

Ce qui ferait croire, même à des satiriques modestes, qu’ils pourraient
bien avoir quelque part dans cette amélioration, c’est l’obéissance
abusive à l’un de leurs conseils (on voit que de tels critiques
n’abusent pas, eux, de la victoire). «Nulle ne serait mieux qualifiée
pour ce titre de Présidente, on n’en saurait trouver de plus affable...»
formulait un libelle bienveillant[13]. Malgré tout, l’auteur n’entendait
pas, avec ce seul propos de consolation, créer, du même coup, un tel
nombre de fauteuils présidentiels, pour un même séant, fût-il bienséant,
parmi tous. Présider, la même année, aux destins de Shakspeare et à ceux
d’Ingres, n’était-ce pas déjà beaucoup, même pour une fringale de
sièges; était-il besoin d’y ajouter encore un discours de réception, en
l’honneur de Madame Paquin, dans je ne sais plus quel cercle?

  [13] Ce n’est pas l’avis de tout le monde; une raison de plus pour que
    ce soit _le bon_. Quelqu’un me dit avoir rencontré, dans une gare de
    banlieue, une petite dame qui gesticulait, levant au ciel de petits
    yeux et de petits bras. Elle parlait de tels ou tels châtelains du
    voisinage et vociférait: «Montesquiou a écrit sur eux des choses
    affreuses!»

    Je demandai le nom de la crieuse; c’était, me dit-on, une
    provinciale, qui habite Fontainebleau, régalée chez ceux qui, dès
    lors, lui paraissent _intangibles_. Un nom qui finit en _i_.

    C’est tout ce dont le narrateur se souvenait.

    J’ai répliqué: «Disait-elle au moins, que le livre était bien?»--On
    m’a répondu: «Pas du tout! Elle était _furieuse_».

    Un voisin de ladite dame aurait encore formulé, parlant de l’auteur
    d’_Une Petite Mademoiselle_: «Il vient de publier un volume dans
    lequel il tape sur toute sa famille.»--Ce n’est pas exact, je n’ai
    pas parlé de lui.

    Me voilà tenu de le dédommager.

Comme je demandais à quelqu’un la raison qui faisait s’unir tant de
hampes et de bâtons, de sceptres et de thyrses, dans une main, sans nul
doute, aristocratique, mais peut-être mieux faite pour le crochet
tunisien ou la broderie anglaise, la personne me répondit: «C’est
vrai... MAIS IL Y A UNE TOMBOLA!»

Cette parole fut le Chemin de Damas de mon incertitude et de mon doute.
Je compris, une fois de plus, que «Dieu fait bien ce qu’il fait» comme
l’affirme notre bon La Fontaine, dans _le Gland et la Citrouille_. Si
les dieux des méchants païens ont créé la Muse de la Danse, et celle de
la cadence, celle du rire et celle du sanglot, il convenait que le Dieu
des bonnes gens leur adjoignît une sœur officieuse, une dixième muse,
_la Muse de la Tombola_, mêlant aux boutons des lotus d’Homère, les
boules du loto, fatidiques et tumultueuses.

Veuillot comparait Hugo à une cloche, dont le métal, fait d’alliages
divers, résonnait tour à tour sous des impulsions que l’écrivain des
_Odeurs_ jugeait par trop dénuées de rapports entre elles, et parmi
lesquelles, je m’en souviens, il citait Polichinelle et Garibaldi.

Après avoir vu donner à l’homme de Guernesey, le titre de cloche, il ne
me semble pas qu’une Muse, si ambitieuse soit-elle, puisse juger
offensant d’être comparée à une clochette; et si cette clochette tinte
au nom de Madame Éloffe, après avoir sonné en l’honneur de Shylock et de
Monsieur Bertin, cela vient de ce que ce n’est pas tous les jours
dimanche.

Et quand toutes les Présidentes du monde viendraient nous certifier que
ces incohérences et ces disproportions représentent l’aléa d’un «rôle de
Mécène» (_sic!_) nous ne ferions aucune difficulté d’en convenir, à la
condition qu’on nous permette d’ajouter que, s’il existe des Muses de la
Tombola, il peut bien y avoir aussi des _Mécènes qui abattent des noix_.

                                   *

                                 *   *

Une nouvelle boîte de petits fours vient d’être mise en vente, sous la
même marque; ceux-là, d’inspiration saline; quelques-uns au fucus et au
varech, d’autres au goëmon et à l’algue; mais la plupart, à la
camomille. Cela s’appelle modestement: _Souffles d’Océan_. Rien que ça!
Comme _Oceano Nox_.

Une chose qui pourrait confondre, c’est que celle qui les glace ne
s’aperçoive pas de ce qu’il y a de téméraire à déranger l’Océan, pour
cette tempête de ventilateur.

Je me souviens d’avoir rencontré, un jour, dans un bureau de poste, une
dame, à qui l’employé demanda son adresse. Elle répondit: _Villa Soupir
des Flots_.--Voilà un titre pour notre poétesse.

Malheureusement, de cette tournée, de cette fournée, je connaissais
déjà, je ne dis pas les meilleures, mais les _bien bonnes_. Tout de
même, pas toutes. Le phénomène traditionnaliste, qui veut bien s’appeler
encore «Mouton à deux têtes», dans une note en bas de page, arbore le
titre plus relevé, de «Bélier Bicéphale», quand il se hausse jusqu’à
l’intitulé. On sent qu’il a fait toilette pour Mademoiselle Vacaresco.
Inutile d’ajouter qu’à défaut de probité _littéraire_ (qui, celle-là
n’est pas à la portée de toutes les lyres) la probité de _renseignement_
est parfaite: quand le _Printemps_ est nommé, en cours de route, et que
ce n’est pas _le vrai_, il y a un renvoi pour expliquer qu’il s’agit
d’un magasin du Boulevard Haussmann. Puisse l’intégrité de ce comptoir
se régler sur celle de cet avis!

L’édifice creux et océanien se couronne par certain _Donjon des
Poupées_, dans lequel je croirais volontiers que l’auteuresse a voulu
faire son _Chantecler_. Elle l’a fait. Même chouette:

    Un orateur la vit, c’était Albert de Mun,
    Le député célèbre, un certain soir d’automne...
    Elle était porte-veine, et lui porta la bonne.

Alors le chœur des hiboux répond:

    Et nous faisions _hou-hou-hou-hou_ en nous aimant.

Survient une puce, qui se change en grenouille. La chouette lui parle
familièrement et lui dit:

    Venez, éclaircissez, pucette, ce mystère.

On voit que la dame n’est pas pour le style soutenu: elle appelle
_pucette_, un insecte qui, selon toute apparence, doit être de fort
volume, si j’en crois les exploits qu’elle lui prête; elle nomme
_Isado_, Mademoiselle Duncan et, petit _Robertus_, le géranium,
_Robertianum_, qui le juge familier.--Qui sait si la puce ne juge pas,
elle-même, le diminutif, amoindrissant?

Encore une citation:

    Quel martyre, pour moi, quand on me taillera!

Heureusement que c’est un lierre qui dit ça!

Une autre:

    L’électricité règne, ici, sur le palier.

Une troisième:

    Moi je vais au café, prendre un apéritif.

Un gentil compliment confraternel:

    Nous vivons, grâce à la poétesse célèbre
    Judith Gautier, artiste au superbe talent,
    Fille de Théophile, ah! je la vis sur _l’Èbre_:
    Elle était magnifique et bonne en souriant.

L’Èbre me fait, je l’avoue, un peu loucher. Madame Gautier est
casanière, elle va de la Rue de Berri à Saint-Enogat, sans beaucoup de
détours. Or, Logrono, Tortose, Saragosse sont des cités trop soucieuses
de leur décorum, pour laisser inaperçu le passage d’une Académicienne.
Alors, pourquoi _l’Èbre_?--Peut-être, après tout, l’auteur des _Poupées_
a-t-il simplement voulu dire: le ruisseau de la Rue du Bac. Il plaisait
à Delphine et peut bien refléter Judith. A moins que ce ne soit encore
un méfait de la rime et, par suite, de la frime. Dans ce cas, la chose
rentre dans ce que d’Aurevilly appelait _blaguer_.

Je reproche un peu d’indifférence à la Josselinaise. Une Sicilienne, qui
lui parle de «l’ensevelissement de ses espérances», reçoit d’elle cette
réponse plutôt détachée:

    Il n’y faut plus penser, prenez de ce café.

Plus loin, ce vers, du moins plein de fraîcheur:

    Madame, avez-vous soif? Prenez de l’eau de Seltz.

A la fin, les choses s’arrangent et toute la troupe réconciliée se donne
rendez-vous «chez Bronne».

_Chez Bronne_... attendez donc... voilà un nom qui ne m’est pas
complètement inconnu[14].

  [14] Peut-être l’auteur veut-il parler de _Braun_. Mais alors, la
    probité de renseignement, dont nous parlions plus haut, devrait
    indiquer la Rue Louis-le-Grand.

Tout est bien qui finit bien.




III

LA SHÉHÉRAZADE DE L’ENCRE BLEUE


Quelqu’un montrait, un jour, à Monticelli, des tableaux de Maîtres. Ce
peintre les admira, d’abord extrêmement, puis excessivement. En effet,
on le vit, avec surprise, et non sans anxiété, se précipiter vers l’un
d’eux et faire mine d’y enfoncer les dents, sur ce cri forcené: «Ah!
celui-là, il est trop beau, _il faut que je le mange_.»

Cette anecdote me revient à l’esprit, chaque fois que je songe à Madame
Bulteau. Ne faire qu’une bouchée d’une si considérable personne, notre
appétit ne va pas si loin; mais on peut, du moins, la _croquer_.

                                   *

                                 *   *

Si cette faim (dirai-je cette boulimie?) représente une prédilection--je
le voudrais--à quel mérite le doit cette Dame de Lettres? Ce ne peut
être à cette seule particularité; car, alors, elle se verrait disputer
mon appétit par combien de hors d’œuvre du genre et même des pièces de
résistance!

Il existe, dans une ville d’Espagne, une cathédrale au centre de
laquelle s’érige une mosquée. C’est une forme équivalente d’_église dans
l’église_ de l’écriture, et d’_état dans l’état_ du féminisme, que je
veux examiner dans la personnalité d’une femme et dans la présentation
d’une auteuresse.

Je sais--je ne dirai pas: que j’attaque, je n’attaque pas--mais que _je
m’attaque_, ou, si vous préférez, que _je m’attache_ à une entreprise
_difficile_ et, par suite, _audacieuse_, deux _qualificatifs_ dignes de
ce nom puisqu’ils impliquent au moins deux qualités, chez celui qu’ils
incitent, plutôt que de le rebuter: _effort_ et _ardeur_. Au reste, mon
modèle, tout le premier, m’en donne l’exemple. Même son audace, à lui,
va jusqu’à une témérité, que je suis loin de blâmer, mais que je ne suis
pas près d’imiter.

Madame Bulteau, il y a quelques trimestres, faut-il écrire: découvrait
l’Angleterre? Non, puisqu’elle conte que ce fut son pays d’adoption,
avant qu’elle ait commencé d’_élire_ (un acte, pourtant, qu’elle a dû
apprendre de bien bonne heure); mais consacrait à «l’âme des Anglais» la
valeur d’un bouquin. Voici dans quels termes il débute: «On se risque,
cependant! C’est ce que je vais faire avec une _inquiétude_ trop
justifiée par mon _incroyable prétention_.»

Risquons-nous donc de même à explorer l’âme de Madame Bulteau, avec une
inquiétude justifiée par notre incroyable prétention.

                                   *

                                 *   *

Ce qu’il y a de plus curieux, dans le cas de Madame Bulteau, c’est la
génération spontanée de son génie; j’emploie ce mot dans la quatrième
signification que lui assigne Littré, à savoir: «talent inné,
disposition naturelle à certaines choses».

Pourquoi ce talent et cette disposition avaient-ils attendu «le milieu
du chemin de la vie» pour se manifester? Était-ce en vue de déférer au
conseil de Flaubert, quand il approuve un auteur qui attendrait l’âge
mûr pour publier ses œuvres complètes? Mais il n’est pas ici question de
la liquidation d’un arriéré, ou de la confession d’un _chiffonnier_,
dont les chiffons seraient des chiffons de papier. Le roman qui en est
sorti est assez massif pour représenter l’Atta-Troll longuement léché,
qui se met à danser sur le tard. Mais ce fauve débonnaire ne joue qu’un
rôle de seconde patte, dans les phénomènes qui nous occupent.

L’Histoire, en outre, nous apprend qu’un Saint-Simon, et même une Boigne
peuvent laisser ignorer, une longue vie durant, la surprise qu’apprêtent
leurs écrits à des survivants qui s’y reconnaissent. Madame Bulteau n’a
pas non plus voulu de cette combinaison déjà pratiquée; elle a publié,
de son vivant, ses carnets posthumes.

Non, le champ d’exercice de Madame Bulteau est comme le territoire du
Marquis de Carabas; l’instant d’avant, il n’y avait pas de domaine;
l’instant d’après, il verdoie et blondit, sous le soleil, grâce au
_Fiat_ du Chat Botté qui l’a créé _ex-nihilo_ et _ipso facto_. Et ce
chat, que vous reconnaîtrez, est un chat qui a des bottes de sept
lieues.

Je ne me suis jamais habitué à voir jaillir du gibus d’un
prestidigitateur, des cigares, des œufs et jusqu’à des colombes. Chaque
fois que je vois paraître une chronique de Madame Bulteau, j’éprouve un
étonnement, plus relevé, cela va de soi, mais un peu du même ordre. D’où
viennent ces londrès, ces coquilles et ces oiseaux? Où gisaient ces
raisonnements et ces tropes?

Car enfin, cet encrier s’est débondé tout soudain et sans prendre le
temps de crier gare, s’est mis à ruisseler aux pentes du _Figaro_, comme
l’Hippocrène de la noix de Galle.

On affirme, et je puis le transcrire ici, puisque la chose n’a rien que
d’élogieux, pour le passé et pour le présent, que Madame Bulteau
collaborait aux romans de feu son mari. Je ne les ai pas lus; mais je me
demande s’ils sont assez _nombreux_, assez _étendus_, pour expliquer le
mystère.

Madame Daudet a joliment décrit, quelque part, ce que peut, ce que doit
être la part de collaboration d’une épouse dans l’œuvre d’un écrivain.
Cette collaboration, elle la compare, à des brindilles peintes au revers
d’un éventail.

C’est charmant, et probablement vrai, en ce qui concerne le ménage
Daudet; mais cela n’élucide rien sur le sujet de Madame Bulteau, que je
me représente difficilement traçant des aiguilles de pin sur un satin ou
sur une gaze, à moins que ceux-ci n’aient pour mission de rafraîchir
Badbec, et qu’il ne soit permis aux traits qui s’y posent d’être aussi
nombreux que les feuilles de la forêt, aussi robustes que le tronc du
cèdre.

On a aussi reparlé, pour tirer au clair ce passionnant problème,
d’articles anonymes ou plutôt pseudonymes, naguère parus dans la _Vie
Parisienne_. Je crois m’en souvenir (on voit que je suis de bonne foi)
et notamment d’un passage, fort bien venu, sur la Marquise de
Saint-Paul, la redoutée pianiste, et où il est dit que «ses accords se
succèdent comme des malheurs».

Ces mesures pour rien n’étaient que «des apéritifs de l’Hymette», comme
dirait Monsieur Claretie; depuis, quoi qu’il en soit, un grand
chroniqueur est né tout armé, du front de Monsieur Calmette. A peine
venue au monde du journalisme, Athénè a retourné son casque, lequel
s’est trouvé être _syphoïde_, et y a plongé sa lance, qui était une
_lance-onoto_.

                                   *

                                 *   *

Ces brumes maintenues sur l’emploi des facultés d’écriture de
l’écrivain, longtemps endigué, dans le passé récent, examinons ce qui
distingue, dans l’actualité, ses pouvoirs reparus, multipliés et
pullulants. Il va nous falloir procéder comme les graphologues, qui
diagnostiquent le despotisme, en le proportionnant à l’élévation,
au-dessus des _t_, du trait qui les barre. Notre Minerve n’est point
_modeste_. Pourquoi le serait-elle? Avant d’éclore graduellement, comme
tous les autres, au monde des publicistes, et de se voir accréditée par
des œuvres successives et édifiantes, elle possédait _de naissance_ et
de _droit divin_, un _terrain d’action_, d’où elle se répandait avec
abondance. Comment une telle exception n’aurait-elle pas donné, à celle
qui en était l’objet, une haute idée de ses pouvoirs?

Ce que d’autres, moins bien intentionnés, dénommeraient _arrogance_,
_outrecuidance_, je l’appellerais tout simplement, et plus aimablement:
_confiance en soi_, si certaines observations ne m’induisaient à en
rabattre. Je l’ai qualifié ailleurs, parlant de la même personne:
_conviction de sa nécessité_; cela est, je crois, plus exact. Quel que
soit le nom dont on le désigne, à quels indices se trahit, tout d’abord,
le _contentement de soi_ qui lui sert de base? Je n’hésiterai pas à
répondre que c’est à certaine façon de _s’injurier_, qui m’a toujours
paru la manière de _minauder_ de l’esprit. Une coquette, qui veut se
faire admirer, feint parfois de ne pas se trouver belle. Une précieuse,
qui veut se faire applaudir, souhaite d’y ajouter une protestation
contre sa modestie simulée. La Galatée de l’Antiquité fuit vers les
saules, mais désire d’abord être vue. La Galatée du Journalisme fuit
vers les ronces et les houx, dont elle se destine les piquants... mais
elle admet d’être retenue.

Comme exemples de ce que j’avance, je citerai quelques passages de
_Fœmina_, _passim_.

«Je me risquerai à dire d’innocents mensonges et _une grande quantité de
sottises_.»--«Revenons, après cette ridicule parenthèse.»--«J’ai fait
d’honnêtes réflexions sur ce sujet, à la fin d’une journée solitaire, où
mon propre égoïsme m’est apparu avec une _rebutante évidence_. J’en
dirai l’occasion; qui sait si deux ou trois _vilaines âmes pareilles à
la mienne_ n’y trouveront pas l’utile leçon que j’en ai retenue?»--«Il
me semble que j’ai dû, aujourd’hui, épuiser la patience des rares
personnes de courage qui m’accompagnent sur les routes, _mal éclairées_,
_incertaines_ et si _ennuyeuses_ où je _trébuche_...»

Notez que l’éminente Dame supporte mal ceux qu’elle appelle «les
raseurs». Tantôt elle le leur envoie dire: «_Quel raseur!_ dit un peu
trop haut une voix jeune et convaincue.» Tantôt elle s’en charge
elle-même, parlant d’une «bavarde professionnelle que rien ne peut
réduire au silence». Puis elle ajoute, un peu plus loin: «Là-dessus,
Dieu merci! la bavarde consentit à se taire.» Et pourtant, cette brave
raseuse, honnête comme un jambon de Prague (nous verrons tout à l’heure
Madame Bulteau célébrer l’intégrité des jambons) n’est-elle pas bien
près de se faire pardonner, quand elle décoche au compagnon Vontade des
apostrophes du goût de celle-ci: «C’est toujours un tel plaisir de vous
entendre parler d’art!...»

Notez encore (et de cela je fais la seconde preuve de la
_selfsatisfaction_) qu’elle ne supporte pas mieux les réserves ou les
objections faites à ses _prêches_ et à ses _prônes_. Ce n’est pas sans
dessein que j’emploie ces deux substantifs, d’ailleurs louangeurs.

Une dame «vieille, aristocratique, bouffonne et bougonne» (ce sont à peu
près les termes qu’elle lui consacre) se plaint de ce que Fœmina écrit
trop souvent sur le sujet de l’_auto_. Ni l’un ni l’autre n’est bien
méchant, pas plus d’en parler que de s’en plaindre. Fœmina n’est pas
contente; plutôt que de concéder un répit à la dame saturée de pétrole,
elle refait, de son mode de traction préféré, le sujet de sa prochaine
chronique, et assène à la réclamante les épithètes que je viens de
citer, qui restreignent le champ de l’enquête. Vieille (ce n’est pas sa
faute); aristocratique (il n’y en a plus guère); bouffonne (elle
l’ignore); bougonne (c’est son droit). Il en résulte que ce n’est pas la
Duchesse de Rohan, qu’on n’a jamais vue de mauvaise humeur. Une
auteuresse, dont on fête les productions, n’est jamais de mauvaise
humeur; or, l’auteur de _Lande fleurie_ est de toutes les Sociétés
Littéraires, quand elle ne les préside pas, et on lui récite de ses
œuvres, à bout portant, comme en pleine poitrine.

Une autre manifestation du mécontentement, celui-là beaucoup plus vif,
s’exerce à propos de Madame Wagner, et s’exerce avec une acrimonie
d’autant plus surprenante, de la part de la _Sagesse_, qu’elle n’en
offre aucun autre exemple et que celui-là (qui se trouve dans le Roman)
est quasi foudroyant. Je voulais d’abord citer le morceau, si vous
voulez, le portrait, qui est une caricature, haute en couleur, et en
colère, légitime, d’ailleurs, comme toutes ses pareilles; elles sont un
droit. Mais j’ai préféré m’abstenir, aussi bien pour le modèle, que je
respecte, que pour le peintre dont le sévère et digne maintien, partout
ailleurs, me paraît, dans la circonstance, avoir procédé _ab irato_. Je
ne crois pas à un malentendu entre l’une et l’autre (elles semblent
faites pour s’entendre) plutôt à la querelle épousée de quelque ami en
susceptibilité avec le _Wahnfried_. Ah! comme, au contraire, je m’y
représente bien, un soir d’entracte, l’auteur de «la Lueur» occupé à
discourir, assis au-dessous du portrait de Schopenhauer, par Lembach, et
près de certaine vitrine de papillons, qui lui fournira des similitudes.

Qu’il me suffise d’avoir démontré que la Dame s’irrite des
contradictions et prouve ainsi que ses arrêts lui semblent plus
incassables qu’elle ne le dit, quand elle plaisante. D’Aurevilly disait:
blaguer. A d’autres minutes, elle parle plus simplement, plus
sincèrement et alors, elle s’exprime ainsi, traitant un sujet: «Je suis,
bien entendu, persuadée de le connaître à fond.»

C’est encore à son texte que je vais avoir recours pour m’aider à sortir
de mon incidente, et je dis, comme elle: «Le détour était long, j’en
conviens.»

Qu’importe, s’il nous ramène au point de départ, à l’heure où nous
récapitulions des traits de _modestie_ un peu suspecte, auxquels nous en
ajouterons un dernier qui, celui-là, ne laisse pas d’être surprenant.

En tête de ce gros _factum_ sur l’Angleterre, il y a une épigraphe.
Comme elle n’est pas guillemettée, on doit supposer qu’elle est de la
Patronne. Voici ce qu’elle profère:

«--Parle-nous de ces choses.

--Mais _je n’y entends goutte_.

--Parles-en _d’autant plus!_ A force d’expliquer _ce que tu ignores_,
peut-être enfin _le comprendras-tu_.»

Que dites-vous de cela?

Quel que soit mon désir de ne pas prononcer le mot _outrecuidance_, il
me semble difficile d’y échapper, cette fois. Je me demandai, d’abord,
si j’avais bien lu, mais le sous-titre de l’écrit était là pour me le
prouver, et nous éclairer: «hypothèses impertinentes», impertinent,
_quod non pertinet_, ce qu’il n’appartient pas de dire, ni de faire. Il
s’agissait donc bien là d’une gageure d’ironie, d’une fanfaronnade
d’omniscience.

Mais cela n’est pas le plus important de l’affaire, ou du moins, il y a
plus important, bien plus important, qui est _aveu d’incompétence_,
déguisé en _hardiesse jouée_. Retenons bien cela et poursuivons: «Prenez
courage, amis, j’aperçois la terre!» disait Léopardi.

Munis du contexte, nous allons le comparer avec un synoptique, lequel
s’exprime ainsi:

«J’écoutais récemment une personne fort _péremptoire_ qui, à chaque
parole, affirmait quelque chose et marquait de haut son dédain pour les
opinions et les actes du groupe auquel elle appartient. On sait toujours
mauvais gré à ceux qui témoignent d’une assez _audacieuse confiance_ en
votre _estime_, ou d’un assez _grand mépris_ de votre _jugement_ pour
vous laisser apercevoir sans scrupule _tout le bien qu’ils pensent
d’eux-mêmes_ et la _sécurité_ qu’ils tirent de là. Aussi, tant de propos
définitifs me donnèrent-ils d’abord un peu d’irritation et un goût de
contredire, dont, à l’avance, j’apercevais la vanité. Mais une remarque
plus solide encore, et plus hautaine que les précédentes, changea tout à
coup mes _dispositions agressives_ en une _affectueuse pitié_; j’avais
compris! n’écoutant plus la personne péremptoire, j’assistais au _débat
qui se poursuivait en elle_ et contestait _l’assurance_ dont, à chaque
parole, elle donnait de si beaux gages. Une fois de plus, mais mieux
qu’à l’ordinaire, je sentais que les _manières_, les _attitudes_, les
_mots_ sont des _déguisements_, des _armures_ sous lesquels _l’âme se
cache et se protège_ afin de n’être pas _atteinte_ en ses points les
plus _vulnérables_, afin qu’on ne lise pas son _secret chéri ou
humiliant_.»

Qui peut bien avoir écrit ce copieux morceau, si fort en désaccord avec
le conseil péremptoire que se donne l’auteur de «l’Ame des Anglais»
avant de commencer sa besogne? Eh! mais, précisément la même Fœmina, en
tête de l’un des deux articles qu’elle a publiés, dans le même journal,
sous le même titre, à un an d’intervalle, sans que l’un soit indiqué
pour être la suite de l’autre, fait que, par parenthèse, je crois sans
équivalent.

Et ce titre c’est: le _Doute de Soi_.

Mais l’excellent _Figaro_, auquel j’ai tant de fois collaboré, m’a donné
d’inoubliables marques de sympathie, au nom desquelles je puis
considérer moi-même, d’un œil sympathique, ce qui peut être tenu pour
des passe-droits. _Fœmina_ les multiplie et les localise. Durant une
longue période, elle a publié deux articles, le même jour. Un dans le
corps du journal, un autre dans le supplément. Je n’en vois pas de
précédent ni d’ailleurs, d’inconvénient. Tout de même, depuis, il y a eu
baisse, on ne sait pour quelle cause. L’article de Fœmina est devenu
bi-mensuel, au moment où on avait pris son parti de le voir
bi-quotidien[15].

  [15] Hélas! depuis, il avait disparu. Encore une forme de despotisme.
    Il rentre en scène, avec une page intitulée: _Recommencements_; un
    titre qui promet. Dans l’intervalle, j’allais dire: dans l’intérim,
    Madame Bulteau a fait deux élèves (presque deux émules) Madame de
    Régnier et Monsieur Bonnard. Ils en héritent du lustre et lui font
    honneur.

Encore un détour. Reprenons.

Ces contradictions flagrantes, ces préoccupations du _doute personnel_,
tout cela prouve ce que nous supposions et voulions faire démontrer, par
l’écrivain lui-même, que la _confiance en soi_, et le _contentement de
soi_, ce sont deux, et que l’un et l’autre n’habitent pas dans cette âme
timide et altière. Écoutez se poursuivre le gémissement de cette double
nature.

«Cette personne péremptoire souffrait âprement du doute de
soi.--Certaines gens paraissent l’ignorer. Ils devraient alors _ne se
plaindre de rien_. Ils n’ont pas _goûté_ la plus pénétrante des
amertumes.»

Mieux encore, lisez tout le premier de ces deux articles, il est
sincère, pathétique et poignant comme tout ce qui décrit ce que l’on
connaît bien. Nous aussi, nous avions «_compris_».

Le deuxième n’est qu’une seconde mouture, moins âpre, plus anodine,
celle-là inspirée agréablement par un joli ouvrage de notre précieux ami
Émile Berr, entre tous, fait pour inspirer des commentaires agréables en
restant sincères. Et cependant, cette variation moins farouche contient
encore cette phrase révélatrice: «Le doute de soi habite jusqu’aux _âmes
orgueilleuses_, et celles-là, peut-être, sont ses _proies les mieux
asservies_.»

Et ailleurs, sur un troisième point, ce retour au leitmotiv «térébrant»
comme dirait la Dame: «Notre ridicule n’est presque jamais candide et
complètement désintéressé. Il résulte de _prétentions énormes_ dont le
doute de soi surexcite l’audace et hausse le ton.»

                                   *

                                 *   *

On s’explique un peu davantage l’extrême prolificité de Madame Bulteau,
quand on a démonté son procédé. Cela se fait aisément. Elle-même le
livre, dans l’avant-propos de son Angleterre et, tout le temps, elle y
revient.

«J’ai retrouvé _l’enseignement au bout de l’anecdote_, la _loi extraite
directement du fait voisin_, le _conseil de reconstruire à chaque minute
d’après un meilleur plan_, et aussi l’habitude de _considérer les
incidents de la Vie matérielle comme des signes et des symboles_ qui
_font allusion à la vie morale et y ramènent_, par tous _les chemins_.»

Non seulement c’est le _procédé_, mais c’est le _programme_. Il est
assez évangélique pour nous laisser surpris d’entendre un lecteur
proclamer qu’il préfère Monsieur le Curé. Qu’est-ce que le brave
ensoutané pourrait dire de plus orthodoxe?

Suite du procédé.

«Mon goût de chercher des _lois_ et des _leçons_ dans _les faits les
plus minces_ est tenté par ce petit problème».

Encore: «Il y a dans _certains incidents tout petits_ et _de médiocre
intérêt_ un _sens qui arrête la pensée_».

Enfin: «Les élections (cela pourrait tout aussi bien être n’importe quoi
d’autre) produisent sur moi un effet singulier. _J’aperçois_... je me
_souviens_... je _revois_... et aussi _reviennent_... _me contraignent_
à réfléchir, j’essaye de faire tenir les _minces et nombreuses
observations ramassées_ en _des points divers_, et celles, plus
évidentes, plus directes recueillies tout près, des _faits accumulés
sans que j’y prisse garde_, dans la _chambre aux débarras_ de ma
mémoire... etc.»

Voilà le schema. Il pourrait servir à l’établissement de cinq cents
chroniques. Il y a servi et y servira. En fin de compte, tout cela
pourrait bien être un peu mécanique. La Dame parle, quelque part, de
l’automate qui, à de certains moments, lui tient lieu d’intelligence.

Dans un accident d’omnibus, où toute la voiturée reste en panne et en
peine, un jeune homme se saisit des rênes, assumant la responsabilité de
continuer la route et de remettre chacun chez soi. Déduction de l’avenir
du jeune homme d’après ce trait de caractère.

Un Monsieur et une Dame se disputent dans la rue. Évocation des ménages
qui se sont disputés et de ceux qui se disputeront, sous d’autres formes
et de nouvelles manières; preuves à l’appui, considérations sur
l’atavisme.

Un jour de migraine, la grande vedette de la Rue Drouot se laisse aller
à pester contre ses voisins, des pensionnaires qui hurlent au bout de
son parterre. Puis elle réfléchit aux raisons, aux nécessités de ces
cris... et, comme Madame de Blocqueville, elle demande à Dieu d’être
meilleure.

Une autre fois, elle donne satisfaction à une fringale depuis longtemps
nourrie, qui est d’aller à la Foire aux Jambons; aux «honnêtes jambons»
comme elle les appelle (Hé! Madame, que faites-vous de la trichine?) Sur
ce terrain, «l’âme taciturne des détritus» (c’est son expression) la
fait ressouvenir de la pluralité des existences.

Je disais tout à l’heure que tous ces ana philosophiques et raisonnés,
pourraient aussi bien porter les titres de _prêches_ et de _prônes_, et
que le client qui se targuait de préférer Monsieur le Curé, négligeait
de s’apercevoir qu’il avait affaire à Madame l’Abbesse. Autant dire,
aussi, moi, sans modestie, que je m’estime plus clairvoyant que le
lecteur qui préfère le Curé, car il ne m’arrive pas d’apercevoir Madame
Bulteau sans me la représenter sous forme abbatiale, en train de crosser
un troupeau de nonnains, qu’elle instruirait en les maltraitant, comme
elle fait, des passants du boulevard, sous prétexte de «quelque
prétention à bien lire dans les âmes».

Qui pourrait se vanter de voir juste et ne pas voir flotter autour de
Monsieur Jean de Bonnefon tout le violet de l’épiscopat et toute
l’écarlate cardinalice, tous deux attristés de ne pas draper l’Évêque
majestueux et le Cardinal magnifique ensevelis en ce laïc, sous le drap
du citadin, la cheviotte du voyageur ou le velours à côte de
l’automobiliste? De même l’étamine émane de Madame Bulteau, la guimpe la
vise, la cornette l’affronte et le vers de Coppée l’entoure de son
phylactère:

    «Le chapelet battant la jupe de flanelle».

Mais ce n’est pas tout, il s’y mêle encore... du _galon_. Si j’osais,
faible Télémaque, me comparer à Mentor, je dirais que, moi aussi,
j’examine les _petits faits_ pour en tirer des _conclusions_. Parmi ces
faits réputés petits, et gros d’indications, je range l’investiture.
_Res Vestiaria_, disait l’Antiquité. Le goût qui dicte le choix de tel
ou tel ajustement, je le tiens un peu pour une âme visible, à son insu,
extériorisant sur les épaules et sur les têtes, des pensées que l’on
croyait secrètes et des sentiments qu’on voulait cachés.

Madame Bulteau, je l’en félicite, n’aime pas qu’on promène par la rue
des plumes amaranthe, des jupons mousseux et des gants qui laissent voir
les coudes; ses idées en matière de toilette sont tout autres, et comme
je les tiens pour révélatrices du moi de cette personne transcendante,
j’examine soigneusement sa parure, chaque fois que ma fortune la place
sur ma route et contre sa roue. Malheureusement ces rencontres sont
rares, rapides et difficultueuses. C’est une sortie de matinée
théâtrale, plutôt bousculée; encore un voisinage de table aux
«Réservoirs» où l’inspection soutenue serait impolie. Une fois pourtant,
un point de Paris que je haïssais tout particulièrement et auquel, à
cause de cela, j’ai pardonné, m’a rendu plus amplement ce service. C’est
la fastidieuse et redoutable Porte-Maillot, qui impose à l’auto un arrêt
rageur, dans la boue, souvent, dans la fétidité, toujours, dans la
mendicité sans grandeur et sans grâce, d’une marmaille bohémienne
assiégeant les portières avec des fleurs contaminées. Le chauffeur passe
plus ou moins de temps à se mettre en règle et les instants s’emploient
à pester. Le hasard fournit, un jour, aux miens, un meilleur exercice de
distraction et d’étude. L’auto voisine, qui était citron, renfermait ou
plutôt découvrait, gracieusement offert à mon télescope, en même temps
qu’à mon microscope, le fuyant objet de mon étude. Tout de suite sa
toilette me frappa. Un chaperon de paille blanche aux bords
raisonnables, contourné de foulard oseille. J’en fus satisfait. Tout
cela donnait raison à mes «hypothèses impertinentes». J’y retrouvais
l’idée de _cornette_ et l’idée de _voile_, en même temps que le souvenir
de la plante génératrice du potage-santé, à la fois saine et acidulée,
me rappelait telles aigreurs que s’étaient attirées certaine «vieille
dame aristocratique et bouffonne» et la grande veuve de Bayreuth.

Mais il y avait autre chose: le justaucorps; oui, celui-là,
positivement, représentait l’armée, et bien que ce fût plutôt, si je me
souviens bien, les Guides de Belgique, le rapport militaire me suffit.
Imaginez un col à la Saxe et des parements auxquels manquait seulement
un numéro, qui aurait pu être matricule, ou bien encore celui de l’auto
_citron_. Or, ces revers étaient _canari_, et j’y relevai ce sens de
l’équilibre, cette science des rapports qui caractérisent le style de la
chroniqueuse. Et, pour la première fois, je sus gré à la station
nauséeuse, au stage fuligineux, qui m’avait offert une nouvelle occasion
de rendre justice à un confrère, non sans authentiquer ma perspicacité.

                                   *

                                 *   *

La Comtesse Mathieu, qui professe de l’admiration pour cet auteur, a
écrit (gentiment ou malignement, sait-on jamais?) en substance, du roman
de Madame Bulteau: «Quel bonheur! Ces chroniques dont nous n’avions
qu’une par semaine, en voilà dix, en voilà vingt, en voilà cent
réunies!»--C’était juste. Ce roman, c’est une addition de chroniques; il
y en a sur tout, sur l’amour, sur la musique, sur l’anarchie... les
personnages se les dégoisent en longs colloques. C’est bien fait,
nourri, assez solide, sans incorrection verbale, mais non plus, sans
style, du moins qui se puisse reconnaître à autre chose qu’au ronron.
Quand un tout petit peu de poésie apparaît, on est étonné, cela fait
l’effet d’un ruban, d’une dentelle ou d’une fleur artificielle, sur un
costume tailleur. Cela ne traîne pas trop, mais ne s’envole pas non
plus; cela marche, _sermone pedestri_ et non sans _sesquipedalia verba_.
On se demande quelquefois pourquoi ce n’est pas entraînant. La vraie
raison, c’est que l’auteur n’_invite_ jamais, il _enjoint_ toujours; et
le lecteur n’aime pas ça.

Cet auteur, il exprime, par une citation Shakspearienne ce qu’il admire
le plus dans le roi Lear: l’_autorité_. Oh! que cette citation-là est
partie du cœur! Mais l’autorité sans persuasion, c’est sec. Madame
Bulteau a une façon de dire: «C’est entendu» qui entraîne à tiquer
contre un raisonnement, qu’un peu plus de latitude aurait fait admettre,
mais qui, présenté sans rémission, fait penser à ces marchands dont le
geste enveloppe avec trop de hâte un objet que vous auriez choisi.

Quant aux _Pierres du Chemin_, elles ont fait le leur, dans le
supplément du _Figaro_; leur _autorité_ a agi, dans un sens imprévu, et
leur _persuasion_ qui, cette fois, ne fut pas absente, a persuadé ce
qu’elles ne poursuivaient point. Ces persuasions sont de deux sortes. La
première, c’est qu’il faut bien peser ses intitulés. Tel n’est pas, à
mon avis, le cas du titre de ce _memorandum_. Et pas d’erreur possible,
il ne s’agit pas là de pierres _précieuses_, du moins dans l’intention
de l’écrivain, qui précise: «Aujourd’hui ce sont des cailloux ramassés
sur les routes allemandes.» Mettons que ce soit des _cailloux du Rhin_.
Il est vrai, je la vois venir, avec son goût de faire réagir contre son
humilité apparente, elle veut se faire dire que ce sont des gemmes; car
enfin, elle doit le savoir, des pierres ce n’est agréable à recevoir, ni
par le nez, ni dans son jardin. Pourquoi pas plutôt: _les Fleurs du
Chemin_? Cela peut s’offrir; c’est même d’ordinaire ce qu’on se fait un
devoir de présenter. Parfaitement, mais à la condition de ne pas
prétendre au titre de Lear de la Chronique; les Fleurs, ce serait la
_persuasion_, les Pierres, c’est _l’autorité_.

L’autre preuve involontaire, faite par cette publication, est plus grave
et peut ouvrir les yeux de plusieurs, de beaucoup, sur le danger de
_l’anticipation_. Que cette leçon vous serve, pondeurs, détenteurs de
petits cahiers qui, retrouvés après décès, feraient, sinon crier au
miracle, du moins viendraient aimablement grossir le flot d’outre-tombe
des menus mémoires pour servir aux historiettes d’un temps; ne lâchez
pas la chose avant l’heure. L’importance du recul, la nécessité du
_m’appar sulla tomba_ se font sentir pour ces déclics. L’accent
funéraire confère aux paroles quelque chose d’achevé, qui change en
oracles, le bavardage; qui sait même si, servis par une voix que l’on
n’entendra plus, ces _sublimes légumes_, bouillis par Fœmina, et qui
nous semblent imposer un peu trop d’écart entre l’adjectif et le
substantif, ne nous paraîtraient pas, en un de ces réflexes chers à
l’auteur des _Pierres du Chemin_, tendre à l’auteur du _Cœur
Innombrable_, un de ces beaux tributs des potagers de Versailles, tels
que Madame de Pompadour en offrait à la Reine.

                                   *

                                 *   *

Madame Bulteau met, quelque part, en parallèle avec je ne sais plus
quoi, les _Diaboliques_ de d’Aurevilly, et ce n’est pas à celles-ci
qu’elle donne raison. Cela va de soi. En réalité, ce qu’elle vise, sans
l’avouer, en infligeant ce mauvais point, ce sont les _Diaboliques
Bleues_ et qui traitent comme elles le font, celles que le grand
critique dénomme: «les Écrivailleuses endiablées.»

Toutes les femmes de lettres d’aujourd’hui sont ces _écrivailleuses_-là,
quand elles ne sont pas des _écrivains_. Mais les unes comme les autres
(je l’ai dit ailleurs, et je le répète) n’ont plus _rien à voir avec le
bas-bleu_. En effet, ce qui distinguait ce dernier, c’était une science,
souvent mal assimilée, mais toujours excessive, dont les premières se
moquent comme de Colin-Tampon, et auxquelles les secondes préfèrent
l’exercice de leur faculté créatrice.

Les deux seuls bas-bleus qui nous restent sont Madame Goyau et Madame
Bulteau. Faisons-les, s’il se peut, se rencontrer, comme les géants
cétacés dont l’espèce se raréfie, et que Michelet compare aux tours de
Notre-Dame, quand ces baleines se retrouvent dans les solitudes boréales
et se mettent debout pour se mesurer. Nos deux derniers _blue stocking_
échangeront leur _savoir_ unique,

    «Comme un long sanglot tout chargé d’adieux.»

Et nous les écouterons disserter, discourir, pérorer, ratiociner,
vaticiner, toutes deux disertes, assez spirituelles et assez braves pour
préférer le reproche arbitraire de pédantisme à l’accusation fondée
d’ignorance.

En attendant, gardons-les, sauvegardons-les, avec toute la piété
nostalgique méritée par les survivants échantillons de races disparues,
les vestiges d’espèces menacées dont, seuls, les moulages, dans les
Muséums, apprendront, un jour, à la Postérité, quelles furent la stature
et la physionomie de Celles qui citaient de mémoire Jean Second de la
Haye, ou Ausone de Bordeaux, au lieu de tromper l’appétit de leur trop
confiante clientèle, avec des versiculets flatulents, qui sont les
beignets soufflés de la Littérature et les _Pets de Nonne_ de la Poésie.

                                   *

                                 *   *

Jean de Bonnefon, déjà nommé, a tracé, de Madame Bulteau, dans la même
_Corbeille des Roses_, un portrait fort bien venu, plutôt que très
bienveillant.

Moi qui le suis, j’insiste sur ce point, je ne fais que citer: «Adonnée
au journalisme, cette dame a retrouvé les formes perdues de l’ancienne
chronique d’idées, sans renouveler les idées.--Elle signe tour à tour
_Fœmina_ et _Jacques Vontade_; mais sous l’un et l’autre pseudonyme,
elle fait naître cette pensée dans l’esprit du lecteur: «Je suis tombé
sur un vieux journal.»--C’est toujours le bavardage de Madame de
Girardin, diminué par une préoccupation de philosophie virile. Quand
elle signe _Jacques Vontade_, Madame Bulteau ne donne pas l’illusion de
la virilité littéraire. Elle est simplement»--_horresco referens!_--«une
impuissance qui veut faire l’homme.»

«Madame Bulteau n’a, d’ailleurs, aucune prétention professionnelle.»--En
êtes-vous bien sûr, Monsieur de Bonnefon?...--«Femme du monde parfaite,
digne de profond respect par la tenue de sa maison et de sa vie, elle
écrit pour échapper à l’ennui de la route. Elle écrit vite des
chroniques qui descendent plus vite dans l’oubli et s’y enfoncent sous
le poids des admirations amicales.»

Un peu oursonnes, aussi peut-être.

«C’est Nietzsche!» s’écriait, un jour, en parlant de la hautaine
Bi-Mensuelle, une de ces admirations-là.

Un mauvais plaisant qui passait, rectifia désobligeamment: «Vous voulez
dire: C’est _Nichts_.»




TABLE


  Brelan de Dames                            1
    I.--Musées pour Rire                     7
   II.--Les Mirlitons Azurés                83
  III.--La Shéhérazade de l’Encre Bleue    131




SAINT-AMAND (CHER).--IMPRIMERIE BUSSIÈRE.


*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BRELAN DES DAMES ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of Maan tasalta, by Frans Emil
Sillanpää

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Maan tasalta
       Vaatimattomia tarinoita

Author: Frans Emil Sillanpää

Release Date: December 17, 2022 [eBook #69567]

Language: Finnish

Produced by: Tapio Riikonen

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MAAN TASALTA ***





MAAN TASALTA

Vaatimattomia tarinoita


Kirj.

F. E. SILLANPÄÄ





Porvoossa,
Werner Söderström Osakeyhtiö,
1924.




SISÄLLYS:

Vasikka ja lammas
Juhannusvieraat
Kanttorin lehmänhaku
Ohjelmaa
Erään talollisen jouluaatto
Vapauden tiellä
Paluu
Aatteen mies
Vaiheessa
Vanha valtias
Erään isän kuolema
Muuan mies
Myllynkivet
Talvinen turtumus
Mosaiikkia




VASIKKA JA LAMMAS


Pitkin kesää oli silmämme silloin tällöin pysähtynyt herttaiseen
näkyyn: päivänpuoleinen karu mäenlape, jonka kupeella hääri suloisessa
sovussa ruskea vasikka, valkoinen lammas ja kolme lasta. Yksi lapsista
oli meidän esikoisemme, kaksi oli mökinlesken, kuten vasikka ja
lammaskin. Nuo viisi elävää olentoa olivat kesän kuluessa tulleet
erottamattomiksi. Poudalla pyrki uni ja ruoka unohtumaan ryhmän
kaksijalkaisilta kokonaan; tästä johtuvat kyyneleet eivät olleet
varsin harvinaisia. Nelijalkaiset sen sijaan hyötyivät kumppanuudesta
melkoisesti. Ne saivat rauhassa maata ja märehtiä päivälläkin;
märepala, joka vasikan kurkkua pitkin määräaikaisesti liukui suuhun,
se oli ikuinen ihme. Päiväin kuluessa saivat ne lukemattomia leivän
palasia alkaen kovasta reikäleivästä hienoihin kaakkuihin asti, joiden
irtiottamisessa havaitsimme perillisessämme huomattavia viehättämis- ja
taivuttamiskyvyn merkkejä.

Me, kuten sanottu, nautimme tuosta näystä. Se oli lapselle
terveellistä ja vaaratonta. Sen lisäksi kiintymys kotieläimiin, noihin
meidän vähempiosaisiin tovereihimme, ei suinkaan voinut vaikuttaa
epäedullisesti hänen orastavaan luonteeseensa, jonka tietysti toivoimme
kehittyvän itseämme jalommaksi. Joskus muistelimme oman lapsuutemme,
omien kotimäkiemme huolettomia päiviä, silloisten vasikkain, kanojen ja
lammasten parissa.

Niinpä kerrankin palasimme erittäin tunnelmalliselta iltakävelyltä
mäkiveräjän ohi, pysähdyimme jälleen hetkeksi, hymähdimme ja jatkoimme
taas.

— Ne ovat kelpolailla lihoneet, tuo vasikka ja lammas.

— Vähemmälläkin vehnäsellä.

— Vileenska on vähän tarjoillut niitä meille — kaksisataa viisikolmatta
koko pari.

— Vai niin. Mitäs me niillä tekisimme? — Kumppanini hymähti eikä
vastannut. Olimme tästä asiasta joskus keskustelleet loppumattomiin.
Minä en kärsinyt teurastamista, mutta kaipasin kumminkin joskus lihaa
syödäkseni. Selitin, että liha on vain jotain massaa, joka hyvin
valmistettuna ei enää tuo mieleeni sykkivää sydäntä, jonka puukko on
vaimentanut. Aina tein kiusaantuneen ilmeen, kun hän ihaili sikaansa
ja sen lihomista. Hänkin kiusaantui ja sanoi: — Älä pakoita minua
ajattelemaan.

— Jokainen ajatus on aina ajateltava loppuun, sanoin minä ylevästi.

— Olisi mahdoton elää jos ajattelisi, sanoi hän ja taputteli sikaa
sydämellisesti.

Näin kävi usein ja niin kävi nytkin tämän iltakävelyn jälkeen.

       *       *       *       *       *

Toverini ja ystäväni tohtori oli perjantai-iltana puhelimella
ilmoittanut saapuvansa luokseni sunnuntaiksi filosofeeraamaan. Tulin
tästä tiedosta sangen iloiseksi: meillä oli takanamme yhteinen
sisältörikas nuoruus, eikä vanhojen siteiden lujittamiseen nyt enää
tarjoutunut tilaisuutta liian usein. Mieleni läikähti onnellisesti
ja puhelimesta palatessani ilmaisin sanoman kumppanilleni hyvin
tartuttavalla äänellä. Mutta vaikutus olikin masentava. Vanha ikuinen
juttu: ei ole mitä tarjota paremmalle vieraalle. Niin ja toinen: ihan
sattumalta ei ole juuri sanottavia rahojakaan, millä mitään hankkisi,
jos jostain jotakin saisikin.

Minä en tietenkään tämmöisiä näkökohtia tunnustanut. — Kyllä se nyt
ainakin tulee sunnuntaina, sanoin lyhyesti.

Kuten sadasti ennen, päättyi tilanne hiukan epäsointuiseen
äänettömyyteen. Kumppanini katosi jonnekin ja minä asetin hyvin salaa
itselleni kysymyksen, onko perhe-elämä ruokineen ja ruokavieraineen
sittenkään sovelias vapaalle, luovalle ihmiselle...

Myöhemmin illalla tavattaessa kysyin kuin ärsyttäen: — No aiotko saada
sille tohtorille mitään toimeksi?

Hiukan tuskastuneesti hän vastasi: — Nieminen tappaa huomenna
Vileenskan vasikan ja lampaan. Ensi viikolla minä lupasin toimittaa
hinnan.

Sitten hän otti keittokirjan ja alkoi suunnitella päivällistä: kuinka
käytettäisiin sydän, munuaiset ja maksa — saavi on kanssa ravistunut,
pitää vielä tänä iltana panna se paisumaan, että saa lihat suolata...
Vileenska lupasi itse tulla avuksi teurastukseen. Saa sitten nähdä,
saako se tällä kertaa veren tallelle, vai meneekö taas maahan.

Minulla oli tekeillä työ, jonka pohja-aatteena oli ylevä sopusointu
ja valoisa usko sen mahdollisuuteen. Muuan toimelias estetikko oli
julkisuudessa puolittain häväissyt minua sen vuoksi, että teoksissani
ei ollut mitään rakentavaa pohjaa. Nyt minä yritin semmoista, mutta
tänäkin iltana teki mielikuvitukseni tepposia. Minä näin vaan vasikan
ja lampaan sydämet; näin ne niin tarkoin, että saatoin täältä
karjapihaan seurata, kuinka eteiset ja kammiot sykähtelivät painaen
lämmintä verta aivoihin, jotka uneliaitten aistinten välityksellä
kehittelivät himmeitä vaistomuksia yhä himmenevästä illasta. Näin vielä
kolme muuta sydäntä, kaksi tuolla ja kolmannen täällä, nekin painellen
hehkeätä nuorta verta ruumiin jäseniin; aivoihin, jotka kuvastelivat
kuluneen päivän hykerryttäviä yhteisiä pikku elämyksiä. Tämmöinen
mitättömyys saattoi vietellä mielikuvitukseni harhateille valmiiksi
viitoittamiltani laduilta.

Näin vielä hiotun teräksen, joka tämän yön valjettua oli tunkeutuva
kahteen sydämeen. Mielikuvitukseni, kun kerran oli karkuteille päässyt,
kuvitteli saman terän tunkeutuvan myöskin noihin kolmeen muuhun
sydämeen. Estetikolla on tuskin oleva iloa minusta.

       *       *       *       *       *

Aamulla siihen aikaan, jolloin lapset juuri vetävät sukkia ja kenkiä
jalkaansa, veti jokin pakko minua ulos. Tavoitin oman lapseni portaissa
ja lähdin heti johdattamaan häntä poispäin talosta. Takapihalla
näin nyljetyn vasikan ruhon riippuvan kinnerissä ja Vileenska tuli
juuri keittiöön päin sisälmyskoppa käsivarrella. Lapsi ei huomannut
kumpaakaan. Se tepasteli sievillä jaloillaan minun kädestäni pitäen
suoraan Vileenskan mökille päin. Oli kuulakka syyskesän aamu, maailma
näytti muuttuneelta. Huomenna oli ystäväni ja toverini tuleva tänne.
Minusta hän tällä hetkellä tuntui sittenkin omituisen vieraalta.
Eikähän siinä mitään kummaa ollut, olimmehan jo kymmenisen vuotta
liikkuneet niin erilaisilla harrastusaloilla. Perheolommekin olivat
muodostuneet niin tuiki erilaisiksi...

Kun lapsen kanssa saavuimme mökille, kohtasimme pihassa kaksi laimeata
silmäparia, jotka näyttivät siltä kuin olisi ne herätetty unesta liian
aikaisin. Jostain syystä pisti silmääni, että navettapihan veräjä oli
jätetty auki.

Toverukset yrittelivät jollain lailla liikehtiä, mutta mitään eloa
ei tullut yhdessäoloon. Enemmän kuin he nautin minä hiljaisista
havainnoistani. Tällainen kuulas aamu kykenee aina hetkeksi saattamaan
minut hyvään tasapainoon.

Laimeasta keskustelusta kävi pian ilmi, että lapset olivat kahden
kotosalla.

— Äiti on teillä, kun siellä tapetaan Kili ja Pekuna, kun teille tulee
huomenna tohtori ja ensi viikolla ne maksetaan.

Minun lapseni silmäsi vaistomaisesti mäkiveräjälle, jossa näkyi vain
kumoon kaatunut juomaruuhi ja joitakin leikkilaitelmia. Sitten se
rupesi tahtomaan takaisin kotiin, näin aikaisin aamupäivällä.

Eipä ollut enää mikään ennallaan. Nämä pienet ja hyvin lapselliset
enteet uhkasivat viedä päiväni pilalle. Lapsen maailmassa oli
ilmeisesti tapahtunut suuri järkytys, vaikkei se siitä mitään
puhellut, vaan poimiskeli alistuneen näköisenä tien viereltä syyskesän
tuoksuttomia kukkia. Minä rinnastelin mielessäni kahta seikkaa:
tuttavani tuloa ja tuon lapsen mielialaa. Toimeton mietiskelijä-elämä,
jota tuo tervehenkinen estetikkokin varmaan vainusi minun viettävän,
paljasti taas huonot seurauksensa: jälkimmäinen seikka oli näet
mielestäni ulottuvaisuuksiltaan verrattomasti suurempi kuin edellinen.

       *       *       *       *       *

Kahden eläimen teurastaminen lisää melkoisesti taloustoimia ja
aiheuttaa siten myös lievää hermostumista. Minä kartan semmoista ja
niin nytkin vetäydyin yksinäisyyteen omaan huoneeseeni. Sieltä näin
kuinka lapseni miettiväisenä kädet selän takana katseli, miten Nieminen
osavasti palasteli lihoja. Jossakin lehvässä näkyi jo hiukan keltaista
väriä. Se avasi mieleeni alakuloisia perspektiivejä kuluneen kesän
valoihin ja leikkeihin.

Touhukkaina kuluivat päivän tunnit iltaa kohden, kun teurastuksen
tuloksia järjesteltiin. (Sen vuoksi juuri on viisasta ostaa lihatavara
elävänä, että siitä saa niin monipuolista.)

Kun kaikki oli parhaiksi kunnossa, soitti tohtori, ettei hän sentään
voikaan tulla. Omin väin saimme syödä nuo kesäisten kuvaelmien
puhumattomat statistit. Lapsikin maisteli mielellään kieltä ja
munuaista.




JUHANNUSVIERAAT


Koivistoja on semmoinen tavallinen asumus, jossa on Villeä ja Miinaa
varten pirtti ja yhtä lehmää varten navetta ja sen yhteydessä tyylikäs
ryhmä muuta semmoista asiaankuuluvaa kopposta. Köyhälistöä ollaan,
mutta ei olla kurjalistoa; ei muuten tule niin tarkemmin ajateltua
mitä ollaan. Eletään kahdestaan vuodesta vuoteen ryppyisinä ja
ruskeapintaisina. Villellä on taipumusta hymyilyyn, Miinalla johonkin
päinvastaiseen. Miina on ikä-ihmisenä tullut tähän leskelle, lapsia ei
ole tästä naimisesta tullut, ei ole oikein sopinutkaan. Ensimmäisestä
naimisestansa Loviisa vainaan kanssa Villellä oli yksi puolihöpsö
tytär, joka vietti suurimman osan ikäänsä Pirjolan navetassa, kunnes
tuli kovin kipeäksi ja nuhisi sitten Kivistojan pirtin muurin takana
Miinan kynittävänä puolen vuotta ennenkuin kuoli. Josta naapurin
ämmillä sitten oli niin paljon suun vaivaa — kun siltä muka jäi niin
maailmattomasti vaatteita ja rahaakin.

On eleskelty suvesta suveen ja lehmää pidetty, ja sitä voin murenoa
aherrettu tarverahoiksi. Kapinat ja muut melskeet ovat menneet
korkealta Villen, Miinan ja lehmän päitten yli. Kun pysyy semmoisista
erillänsä niin paraan pitää, oli he sitten punasia elikkä muita
valkosia. Miinassa olisi kyllä elävinen eine temokraatin henkeä, mutta
on Ville sentään näinä arkoina aikoina saanut sen silmän vilkutuksella
hillityksi, ettei ole joutunut herrojen mustiin kirjoihin eikä
esikuntiin. Pitkiä ajantaipaleita kuluu siten ihan tasaisesti. Mutta
kun epätasaisuutta kerran tulee, niin sitten sitä tuleekin kerrakseen.
Silloin on harmia harmin päällä niin osaavasti, että ihan kutkuttaa
ja tavan takaa hymähdyttää. Ei ollenkaan enää kannata tulistua, niin
somasti kaikki silloin kääntyy poikkipuolin.

Se alkaa jo aamulla noustessa, niinkuin se alkoi sinä juhannusaattona,
jona Tampereen masuunin kallispalkkainen työmies Jalmar Heino
hattupäine rouvineen, polvipöksyisine poikineen, kangaskenkäisine
lapsentyttöineen kaikkineen sai päähänsä lähteä juhannukseksi maille
ja nimenomaan Kivistojan asumukseen, jonka ensimmäisen emännän
veljenpoika hän tiesi olevansa. Tämmöinen päähänpisto oli tietysti
tavattoman lapsellinen ja älytön ja johtui siitä väärästä käsityksestä,
joka kaupungin herrasväellä on maaseudusta: että siellä on aina
emäntien aitoissa ja komeroissa hyvää rievää, voita, viiliä ja muita
»maalaisruokia» ja että papan knalli ja mamman hattu melkein huimaavat
yksinkertaisia maalaisia. Niin on arvattavasti joskus ollutkin;
siihen aikaan kun maalainen hankki saada selkäänsä, jos vei leipää
Tampereen torille. Mutta kun leipäkysymyksessä osat enemmän kuin
täydellisesti vaihtuivat, niin säilyttivät kaupunkilaiset herttaisesti
käsityksensä knallin ja olkihatun vaikutuksesta. Niinpä Jalmar Heino
tänä juhannusaattona melkein tunsi hentoa tunnonvaivaa, kun oli niin
unohtanut yksinkertaiset maalaissukulaisensa. Hänen mielialassaan oli
todellista juhannusvirettä, kun hän puolelta päivältä töistä päästyään
alkoi sen monipuolisen laittelun, joka oli päättyvä leppoisaan iltaan
Kivistojan pihamaalla juhannuskoivujen leyhkän sulautuessa saunan
lemuun. Kyllä Heino vielä hyvin muisti maalaissulot.

Mutta — mutta. Ihmiskohtalot ristivät omituisesti toisiaan. Jos
Jalmar Heinolla olisi ollut taipumusta enteiden ymmärtämiseen —
jotka enteet kylläkin saivat varsin kouraan- ja korvaantuntuvan
muodon lasten ja vaimon, Fiinan, puhelahjan välityksellä — niin
olisi hänen pitänyt aavistaa jotakin siitä, että Kivistojan lehmän
Jertan kolme viikkoa sitten tapahtunut astutus oli juuri tänä päivänä
näyttäytynyt epäonnistuneeksi ja niin ollen iloinen tapaus Kivistojan
maito- ja koko muussakin taloudessa siirtynyt niin myöhäiseen kuin
Maarianpäiväviikolle. Ynnä monet muut tähän takertuneet seikat, jotka
juuri täksi juhannukseksi muodostivat Kivistojan pariskunnan elämän
tielle vaikean kolukohdan.

Tämä elämän epätasaisuus kohtasi Kivistojan Miinaa kovin sopimattomaan
aikaan. Oli näet asia niin, että Miinan ja Villen piti juuri huomisena
juhannuspäivänä suorittaa kertavuotinen ripilläkäyntinsä ja se
matka ei ollut Miinalle mikään tavanmukainen velvollisuus, kuten se
on monen monelle mökinakalle. Erinäiset perisynnit, kuten kiukku,
häijyys, kateus, jotka hänessä olivat hyvin kehittyneet ja monella
muotoa toisiinsa sekaantuneet, ilmenivät joka suvi sakramentin
lähestyessä Miinan sisäiselle ihmiselle kaikessa hirvittävyydessään.
Ja hänen kiivas mielenlaatunsa ei sallinut hänen siinä tilassa käydä
alttarin ääreen, vaan ponnisteli hän jo viikon päivät edeltä päin
saavuttaaksensa leppeän sisäisen sopusoinnun. Hän kahvitti naapuriämmiä
ja esitti puolisoonsa Villeen kohdistuvat jokapäiväiset moitteet
äitelän autuaallisella äänellä, mikä siinä määrin tympäisi Villeä, että
hänen kasvonsa noina Miinan kilvoituksen päivinä ehtivät vajota melkein
samanlaiseen happamuuteen kuin Miinan tavallisesti.

Juhannusaaton edellisenä iltana oli Miinan sisällinen ihminen jo
saavuttanut kaipaamansa tilan ja ehtoolla sänkyyn oikaistessaan
häntä vaivasi semmoinen harhatunne, että juhla onkin jo huomenna.
Se todella vaivasi kun muisti että huominen arki monine vihollisen
koettelemuksineen oli vielä läpäistävä. Hän oli nukkuvinaan, mutta
viimein täytyi ähkäistä, jolloin Ville — hänen hengellisen vaelluksensa
pahin koetuskivi — omasta sängystään suun massutuksella ilmaisi myös
olevansa valveilla.

Ei tämä nyt sujunut. Huominen oli oleva huono päivä. — Mitä se äijäkin
siellä vielä ähisee.

Yö kului ja aamu toi aurinkoisen juhannusaaton, sen turmiollisen
päivän, joka Miinan vielä oli läpäistävä ennen rippimatkaa.
Sielunvihollista mainitaan usein sarvipääksi ja niin se ainakin
tässä tapauksessa oli. Sillä se seikka, joka Jertasta jo edellä tuli
mainituksi, ei ole niinkään yksinkertainen. Se tuottaa jo sinänsä
melkoisen harmin ja sitä voi pahimmassa tapauksessa jatkua koko päivän.
Ja jos lehmä vielä päivällisestä retkestä huolimatta on siinä tilassa,
että se potkaisee kiulun ja Miinan nurin, niin on täysi syy olettaa,
ettei asia tälläkään kertaa vielä ole tullut autetuksi, vaan siirtyy
iloinen navettatapaus Maarian päivästä Tipurtiuksen päivään.

Kuuma juhannusjuna ähkii asemalle ja puhkii siinä hetkisen, että nuo
omituiset ihmislapset saavat toteuttaa ällinsä, jotka vaativat toisia
saapumaan ja toisia lähtemään. Kun ihmiset ovat mielestään tarpeeksi
käyneet ulos ja sisään, lähtee juna taas ähkimään toisia paikkakuntia
ja toisia juhannusvalmistuksia kohden.

Mutta tästä lähtee laiva, hikinen täyteen pakattu laiva, jossa on
kymmeniä eriarvoisia herrasväkiä — kaikkihan ne herrasväkiä on, mitä
kaupungista tulee. Siellä on myös Heinon herrasväki lapsineen ja
lapsentyttöineen kannatellen yllänsä hiukan raskaita varallisuutensa
merkkejä: tummia vaatteita, uusia kenkiä, knallia ja kauluksia ja
taistellen maitoa parkuvien lastensa kanssa.

— No ei Tauno itke nyt — tätin tykönä Tauno saa — Tauno on tuhma.

Viimeisellä laiturinvälillä on Heino päässyt puheisiin muutaman
isäntämiehen kanssa, jolta kuulee, että Kivistojalla voidaan hyvin. —
Ei ne sentään kapinaan sekaantuneet.

— Ei ole vielä nähty sedän toista emäntää ollenkaan ja lähdettiin nyt
katsomaan, sanoo Heino.

Isäntä mulauttaa omituisesti silmiään ja virkahtaa sitten:

— Neh, kyllä-mar sitä näin suvella sopii... Mutta hänen silmäkulmassaan
on jotain epäilyttävää.

Omituinen vähä-ääninen, hillitty ja pingoittunut myrsky on puhaltanut
Kivistojan asumuksen yli.

Sattui niin että Heinon Fiina näki Kivistojan Miinan ammottavaa
kureliivien puutetta huutavan vartalon juuri sillä hetkellä, jolloin
Miina loiskasi tunkiolle sen lopunkin maitotilkan, joka Jertan
potkaisun jäleltä oli kiuluun jäänyt.

Ville hymyili vaisusti vieraita suostutellen, Miina punotti ja tutisi.
Lapset parkuivat yhä maitoa, jota »tädin tykönä» oli määrä saada.

— Ei täti taida nyt voida antaa, sanoi Heino.

Yleinen sovinnaisuus estää mainitsemasta sitä paikkaa, mistä Miina
kehoitti herrasväkeä maitonsa hakemaan, joka lause samalla oli Miinan
ensimäinen puhe vieraille...

       *       *       *       *       *

Kello kymmenen aikaan makaa Miina yksinänsä navetan ullakolla. Myrsky
on puhaltanut Kivistojan asumuksen yli, mutta nyt on myrsky tyyntymään
päin, sillä Miina itkee. Se tapahtuu harvoin. Mutta harvoin on Miina
myös niin äärimmäisen kurjassa tilassa vuoteellensa oikaissut, kuin
tänä ripilläkäyntinsä edellisenä iltana. Eilisiltainen sopusoinnun
huippu kääntyi tämän pahan päivän kuluessa ylösalaisin. Pirtissä on
sikin sokin pitkällään jotain ihmeellistä joukkoa, joka on syönyt hänen
silakkansa, perunansa ja leipänsä ja vielä tiedustellut eikö satu
viiliä olemaan. Siellä ne makaavat, ja jäävät huomiseksikin makaamaan,
eivätkä tietystikään jätä hänen paikkojaan pitelemättä, sillaikaa kun
hän Villen, sen tohelon, kanssa on Herranehtoollisella. Voi hyvä Isä,
kuinka sinä lastasi koittelet, kuinka mahdotoin ja kelvotoin on ihminen
eikä sille mitään voi.

Miinan päässä humisee tämän maailman sekavuus ja suuruus, hänellä on
sekä aineellinen että hengellinen hätä. Hänen koettelemuksensa on
kovempi kuin hän kestää jaksaa. Hän itkee...




KANTTOORIN LEHMÄNHAKU


Asiallisesti ottaen oli tämä kanttoori jo vuosikymmenen ajan ollut
elävänä kuollut; mikäli hänellä yleisön kesken enää oli jotakin
merkitystä, oli se puhtaasti kirkkohistoriallista laatua.

Hän oli päässyt lukkariksi ammoisina ja kaikin puolin nykyistä
parempina aikoina yksinomaan heleän äänensä todistuksella, jolla
äänellään hän sitten oli viidettäkymmentä ajastaikaa seurakuntaa
palvellut, ollen niiden pappien luku, jotka hän oli saarnatuoliin
laulanut, yksi kolmattakymmentä ilman maistereita ja lukiolaisia. Hän
oli puhutellut kahta piispaa ja viittä tuomiokapitulin asessoria ja
hän oli vanhalle provastivainaalle, joka myös oli tohtori ja ritari,
valmistanut ja maistamalla varmentanut jokaisen totilasin, jonka tämä
kinkereillä ja kotosalla nautitsi. Hän oli veisannut viimeisen virren
yhden suvun neljälle miespolvelle, hän oli sitonut lukemattomia haavoja
ja taittuneita raajoja ja hän oli — koristeellisin alkukirjaimin ja
hanhen kynää »läkkihornaan» kastaen — kirjoittanut lukemattomia kauppa-
ja moonakirjoja.

Mutta »ihmiskunnan histooria», josta hänellä myös oli melkoinen
aavistus, oli hänen vanhentuessaan saanut omituisen huiman vauhdin ja
jo kauan sitten jättänyt vanhan kanttoorin epähienosti tiepuoleen.
Hänen elämänsä oli todellisuudessa keskinkertaisen mäkitupalaisen
tasolla, vaikka siinä vielä hiukkasen vivahtikin laskeneen päivän
viimeistä rusoa. Hänen kaikki vaatteensa olivat väljiä ja omituisen
vihertäviä ja leuan alla lepsui tyhjä nahka kuivahtaneiden
kaulajänteiden varassa. Huoneellisenkaan elämän puolesta ei tämän
vanhan ja ehytluontoisen hengenmiehen ikäpuoli ollut niin tyventä
kuin olisi kohtuudella voinut odottaa. Hänen aviovaimollaan oli
nuorempanakin melkoisesti äkäisen muorin taipumuksia ja olivat ne
huomattavasti lisääntyneet siitä ruveten, kun pitäjään otettiin
kouluutettu kätilö ja kantturskan leipä sitä myöten ohenemistaan oheni.

Talvet olivat vaikeinta aikaa. Silloin ahdisti pahemmin muorin morailu
ulkoapäin ja hengensalpa sisältä päin. Ja, mikä pahinta, silloin
nukkui luomakunta, mehiläiset, kukkaset ja kaikki yrtit. Sillä kuinka
lieneekin muu maailma jättänyt kanttoorin jälkeensä, yksi oli, joka
vuotten vieriessä vaan yhä läheni: korea kesäinen luonto lukemattomine
seikkoineen, joista tällä paikkakunnalla ei ollut muilla aavistusta
kuin kanttoorilla ja Lumpeilan lehtorilla. Lumpeilan huvila oli parin
kilometrin päässä kanttoorin mökiltä ja lehtori oli melkein yhtä vanha
kuin kanttoori, mutta oli naimaton ja luonteeltaan äkäinen, vanha
pukki, josta tiedettiin ettei hän pelännyt jumalaa eikä muutamissa
suhteissa hävennyt ihmisiäkään. Hentomielinen kanttoori kauhistui
ystävänsä puolesta muistaessaan, mitä tämä kerran ryypyn ääressä oli
häneltä kysyä köhäissyt: paikkakunnan tyttöjä — öhö — höm —

Mutta eräänlaiset ystävykset he kumminkin olivat.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nytkin juuri kanttoori kävellä tepsuttelee Lumpeilasta kotiinsa päin
»myhäillen ja somat ruusut punertavat hänen poskillansa», kuten
muinoin erään hänen kuuluisan virkaveljensä. On kesäinen iltapuoli
ja kukkivien yrttien luku on runsaimmillaan. Kanttoori tuntee niistä
jokaisen lajinsa jälkeen, hänen silmänsä vaan ikäänkuin toteaa,
että ne kaikki ovat paikoillaan omassa suloisessa järjestyksessään.
Mutta kädessään sanomalehtipaperissa hänellä on toisia yrttejä,
arvokkaita saxifraga-lajeja, joita hän on saanut lehtorilta. Hänellä
on kotona kiviriutta niitä varten, siinä niiden on hyvä kasvaa. Siellä
on jo ennestään useita saman suvun yksilöitä ja muutamia hienoja
maksaruoholajeja.

Kanttoorin elämä on tämmöisellä hetkellä paraassa vireessään. On vain
yksi vakinainen harmi, jota kanttoori ei voi kitkeä pois: kotona on
Karoliina ja se vihaa näitä asioita. Se vihaa Lumpeilan lehtoria, kuten
muutkin kirkonkylän rouvat (joihin hänetkin, herranähköön, lasketaan)
ja se valmistaa mielellään pienen myrkkypisaran kanttoorille, joka
yrttiensä parissa laiminlyö asiallisemmat tehtävät. Nytkin kanttoori
tietää, että hänen olisi ollut haettava lehmä laitumelta, mutta hän
on myöhästynyt. Painuva aurinko ja talojen tarhoissa olevat lehmät
ikäänkuin kantelevat hänen päällensä. Mutta hänellä on saxifragoja
kädessään, hän saa ne sinne riutalleen kasvamaan, vaikka kuinka olisi
asiat. Ja sitten on lehtori selittänyt hänelle erään harvinaisen yrtin,
jota ei ole täältä löydetty, mutta jonka hän epäilee täällä kasvavan.
Kanttoori on päättänyt löytää sen; koko luomakunta ikäänkuin kihelmöi
sen kasvin löytymistä. Sillä on keltaiset huulikukat ja semmoiset
lehdet. Itse akatemian professori on lehtorille sanonut, että sen
pitäisi täällä kasvaa. Kanttoori hyräilee...

Jo paistavat kotinurkkauksesta kanttoorin silmään hirvenjuuren komeat
keltaiset kehrät ja näkyvät Siipoltin tattarin jättiläislehdet.
Kanttoori odottaa näkevänsä Karoliinan äkäisenä lypsinkiulu kädessä
palaavan tarhalta, joka näky äkäisyydestään huolimatta kuitenkin hyvin
sopeutuisi illan tyveneen. Kanttoori hiipii yrtteineen kuin pahoja
tehnyt poikaviikari takatietä kiviriutalleen. Mutta silloin hän huomaa,
että tarhan veräjä on auki aamuisellaan eikä lehmää eikä Karoliinaa näy
missään. Kuinkas nyt on asiat? Hän ilmeisesti hätiköi istutuksessaan
ja rientää sitten sisään. Siellä istuu Karoliina käsivarret ristissä
rinnoilla, yläruumis hiukan vaappuen ja pää kiukkuisessa kenossa, mutta
ei virka sanaakaan. Nyt on jotain tavallista pahempaa.

— Mihinkä lehmä on joutunut? kysäisee kanttoori vakavana.

— Kysy yrteiltäs, kivahtaa Karoliina ja ylös ponnahtaen jatkaa: — Kun
kerran voi juosta kaiken maailman ruohojen perässä niin saisi sitä
joskus juosta lehmänsäkin perässä j.n.e. Karoliinan hameenhelmat, jotka
lehmänhaun jäleltä vielä olivat neuloilla ylös reivatut, ikäänkuin
häpäisivät kanttooria siinä hänen edessään tuiskiessaan. Hän sai
selville, että lehmä ei ollut tavallisilla paikoillaan — »ja minä en
viitsi juosta, olkoon siellä, mennään vaivastalolle taikka ruvetaan
syömään yrttejä.»

Tuossa tuokiossa oli kanttoori jo taipaleella. Hän eteni metsänrantaa
kohden nuoran pätkä kädessä. Hänen kiihtynyt mielensä oli näkevinään
siellä suuren ilvehtivän lehmänpään.

       *       *       *       *       *

Noin parin tunnin päästä on tilanne semmoinen, että uupunut kanttoori
istuu kannon päässä keskellä korpea ja ihailee karhunsammalen
vehmautta. Hän ei ole nähnyt lehmästään jälkeäkään eikä kuullut kellon
kilausta. Hän olettaa sen uupuneen suohon ja sinne kuolleen; elämä
on melkein niinkuin mennyttä ja epätoivon ollessa täydellinen vaipuu
kanttoori tahtomattaan tuttuun luonnonihailuun, joka tällä suviyön
hetkellä kuitenkin tuntuu omituisen teennäiseltä.

Hän nousee ja paarustaa pitkin matalan suokselman syrjää. Ei ole nyt
mitään kiirettä kotiinkaan tämmöisen tuleman jälkeen. Hän aprikoi
koko viime vuosien elämää, jossa selvästi näkyy lopullisen tuhon
johdonmukainen lähestyminen. Nyt meni lehmä. Mutta kuinkas entinen
kanttoori voidaan viedä vaivastalolle, kanttoori, jolla on semmoinen
entisyys ja jonka toimet ovat tulleet akatemian professorin kirjoihin.
Professorilta ja lehtorilta ei mene lehmä suohon eikä heillä ole
Karoliinaa — — —

Mutta mikäs — mikäs siinä kohahti, pysähtyi ja taas kohahti! Näreen
takaa näkyi villikatseinen lehmän pää ja sitten koko lehmä, joka kerran
puhahti ja samassa laukkasi pois häntä riettaasti kaarellaan.

Kanttoorin äskeiset suruvoittoiset mietelmät olivat vain sitä varten,
että ilo nyt olisi kirkkaampaa. Hän lähti juosta hönkäisemään, juoksi
ensin suon sivua, sitten yhä kohoavaa männikköä aina välillä kuulostaen
ja maanitellen. Joskus ei kuulunut hiiskaustakaan, kunnes taas puhahti
aivan lähellä — ja sitten taas mentiin pensaitten kiihkeästi kahistessa.

Kun näin oli tapahtunut useita kertoja yritti kanttoori jo tulistua.
Hän meni hullunkurista puolijuoksua kasvot hehkuen ja rinta läähättäen,
hän ei enää tarkannut maanpinnan muotoa eikä luonnonesteitä, hän
halusi intohimoisesti käydä kiinni lehmäänsä vaikkapa hännästä.
Nyt hän sen saa, jos saa. Yö on jo puolessa. Hän juoksee, silmissä
tuntuu kostealta, mutta hän juoksee, kunnes — niin kunnes hän makaa
kaatuneitten puunrunkojen päällä rotkon pohjassa. Häntä on tainnut
kelpolailla sattuakin ja lehmä menee menojaan, mutta kanttoori ei
kiiruhda nousemaan. Hän tahtoo siinä pitkällään nautiskella siitä mitä
on tapahtunut.

Sillä suoraan hänen silmiensä edessä kukkii melkoinen määrä niitä
keltaisia huulikukkia, joita lehtori päivällä hänelle selitti.

       *       *       *       *       *

Yö on jo aamupuolellaan, kun Lumpeilan huvilan ovelle kolkutetaan..
Pian kuuluu sisältä vanha kopea ääni: »Kuka shh—na shielä bulttaa?»

— Minä täällä olen, Vilhelmi.

Kanttoori siellä seisoo toisessa kädessään lehmännuora ja toisessa
keltaisia kukkia. Lehtori tulee ulos, aamuöiseen ilmaan, näkee kukat
ja murahtaa unissaan. Sitten mennään etsimään niille soveliasta
istutuspaikkaa. Ikäänkuin yhteisestä sopimuksesta puhutaan niin
vähän kuin suinkin. Lehtori sanoo vain: tsjah, tsjah — kun kanttoori
huomauttaa, että ne siellä kasvoivat aurinkoon ja varjoihin nähden
tuohon ja tuohon tapaan.

Kaksi vanhaa äijää kuhkii siellä aikansa, omassa uhossaan. Toiselta on
juossut lehmä tiehensä ja molemmiltakin on juossut koko elämä tiehensä.
Mutta nyt he ovat taas yhdessä ja molempien mielen täyttää voimakas
täyden elämän harhakuva. Kolmantena on kostean veikeä aamuaurinko. Kun
äijät ovat poistuneet ja aamurauha palautunut, näkee aurinko eräässä
huvila-alueen kohdassa uusia keltaisia kukkia, jotka ovat siihen
ilmestyneet aurinkoa tarvitsematta.

Kanttoori on aikamoinen näyttelijä ja osaa valehdellakin, kun
korkeammat asiat niin vaativat. Kun hän auringon jo paistaessa tulee
kotiin Karoliinan pariin, on hän syvästi masentunut »juostuaan korvessa
koko yön näkemättä lehmästä hännän päätäkään».




OHJELMAA


Hietikon muorin piika Laina on erikoinen olento omassa säädyssään. On
jotakin hempeän liikuttavaa siinä, että hän on _vain_ piika. Tulee
ikäänkuin liian tehokkaasti mieleen tuo vanha totuus, että jaloja
inhimillisiä aartehistoja voi piillä ulkonaisesti vähäisemmissäkin
asemissa. Nuorella tytöllä voi olla sievät runonlahjat ja siveellisesti
puhdas luonne eikä hänessä ole muuta vikaa kuin se, että hän
Kohtalottaren oikusta on sattunut syntymään tehtaantytöksi tai
piikatytöksi. Eihän kukaan tule tarkanneeksi sellaisen kainon tytön
vienoja runoja, kun suuret ja mahtavat ammattirunoilijat itsekkäästi
vetävät kaiken huomion omaan puoleensa. Monet ihanat korpien runoruusut
kukkivat ikuisesti hukkaan.

Mutta Laina Katajistoa odotti tänään huomattava menestys. Saatuaan
päivällispesun miten kuten loppuun oli hänellä jo hyvä kiire omiin
juhlavalmistuksiinsa, sillä tämä elokuinen pyhäpäivä raukeni iltaa
kohden, ja nais-ihmisellä, joka ei juuri koskaan käy iltamissa, on
melkoisesti puuhaa kun hänen kerran on sinne mentävä. Laina Katajisto
harsi ja silitti valkoisia alus- ja päällysvaatteitaan. Poskilla
heloitti jähmeä puna ja silmien alla laajeni sinertävä suonikas ala.
Vaalean kellervä tukka, jonka jakauksessa paljastui valkoinen päänahka,
oli jo saanut salaiset käsittelynsä; kalsean puhtoinen naisenpää oli jo
täydessä juhla-asussaan, alusvaatteillaan häärivä muu ruumis ikäänkuin
riepoitti sitä mukanaan ylimpänä jatkonaan.

Iltapäivä eteni järhähtämättömästi kiihdyttäen hankkeita ja
muistuttaen pääasiaa: runoa, jonka Lainan oli määrä lausua iltamissa,
jotka vietettiin paloruiskun hankkimiseksi kylän vastaperustetulle
palokunnalle.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lainan runoilu oli pysynyt jokseenkin salaisena asiana. Hän oli
hiukan häpeillen ja jännittyneenä lähetellyt tuotteitaan sinne tänne
ja lopulta kokenut sen korkean hetken, että sai nähdä yhden runonsa
painettuna, tosin pahoin runneltuna ja typistettynä, mutta kumminkin
hänen nimellään varustettuna. Mutta lehteä ei täällä lukenut muut kuin
hänen ystävänsä Anna Mäkinen, jolla itsellään taisi olla kirjallisia
harrastuksia, vaikka hän ihailikin Lainaa etevämpänään. Juuri hänen
totensa Laina joutui tähän tämänpäiväiseen tilaisuuteen.

Palokunta tarvitsi ruiskun ja rahat saatiin parhaiten iltamilla.
Mutta vaikka iltamissa olikin pääasiana tanssi ja remseä meuhaava
yhdessäolo, niin tarvittiin siinä myös ohjelmaa, sen tiesi Seet
Järvinen, märkäviiksinen, rivosuinen suutari, joka oli keskeisenä
henkenä palokunnassa. Järvinen piti siis kokouksen ja järjesti siellä
reippaasti ohjelman. Hän oli nuorempana itse lukemattomissa iltamissa
läpäissyt tuon välttämättömän pahan, oli kännissä meuhaten monet
kerrat häirinnytkin ohjelmaa huudellen tankkaileville näyttelijöille
karkeita kokkapuheita, niin että hänellä oli kyllä vaisto siitä
kuinka oleellinen osa ohjelma on iltamissa. Tavallinen mies ei
semmoisista turinoista piittaa, pikemminkin ne häntä tympäisevät,
kun hän ajattelee, että iltamaherrat ja -neidit kuvittelevat hänen
niitten vuoksi tulleen heille rahojansa tuomaan. Mies tulee iltamiin
omaa remseyttään eikä vertaistensa lällättelyjä kuulemaan. Palokunnan
iltamiin oli siis saatava satuja ja muita lausuntoja. Mäkisen Anna
kyllä lupasi lukea kertomuksen, mutta tarvittiin siinä muutakin tarua.
Silloin juuri Anna muisti ystävänsä Lainan ja ehdotti, että tätä
pyydettäisiin lausumaan runo. Eihän Lainan kyvyistä ollut suutarilla
eikä muillakaan tietoa, jonka vuoksi ehdotus ensin herätti sen mukaisia
ilmeitä ja ääniä. Mutta Anna sanoi: »Se tyttö kykenee enempään kuin me
yhteensä. Onkohan vaan kenenkään meidän runoja painettu sanomalehtiin,
mutta Lainan on».

— Pyydä sinä sitä sitten tekemään sen esityksen, sanoi suutari. Kun
tuli puhe näytelmästä, lupasi suutari yksinänsä järjestää sen. Hän
tiesi, että kaupungista saa lainata naamareita ja peruukkeja ja
että näytelmäksi auttaa, kun jotkut niihin pukeutuneina vähän aikaa
tanssivat ja muuten kekkalehtavat.

Tärkein järjestelyseikka suutarille oli saada luontevasti päätetyksi,
että hänen vaimonsa sai järjestää koko puffettikomennon. Kun se oli
päätetty, oli suutari hyvin toivorikas iltamien suhteen.

       *       *       *       *       *

Anna tuli Lainaa ottamaan ja ystävättäret lähtivät iltamatalolle
suloisesti kiihtyneinä ja läheisesti supattaen. Anna oli joskus
ennenkin esiintynyt, Laina oli ensikertalainen, ja pelkäsi kauheasti.
Hänellä oli runo taskussa ja päässä, mutta se tuntui molemmissakin
kovin avuttomalta tällä matkalla. Tuntui ennakolta siltä kuin olisi
ollut menossa vieraalle joukolle tunnustamaan jotakin pientä ja
salaista vikaansa — niinkuin kirkkoon mennessä kotoinen elämä seuraa
mielessä hiukan ujostuttavana häipyvänä kajona. Tuli alinomaa mieleen
runon ensi säkeet: »Tein kerran retken aatteen valtakuntaan, mua sinne
kutsui oma sydämeni» — pitikö hänen sanoa semmoista tuossa talossa
tuon tanssia odottavan tungoksen keskellä. Kyllä Annan kelpasi, se ei
lukenut omaa tekemäänsä...

Seet Järvinen oli ilmeisesti hiukan pöhnässä nytkin, kun hän
miesjoukolle sivumennen sutkauksia laskien hääri edes takaisin. Väkeä
oli paljon, tytön taskussa piilevään runoon nähden oli tilaisuus
suhdattoman suuri. »Terveyspuhe» oli jo ohi, sen oli suutari itse
pitänyt, eikä näyttänyt yhtään sitä häpeävän. Hän meni puffettiin
juomaan kahvia vain rehvastellakseen sillä, ettei tarvinnut mitään
maksaa. Hän huusi Lainalle ja Annalle: »Tulkaa vaan tekin plikat, te
olette kansa ohjelmaa».

»Kumpikas teistä ensin lukunsa lukee?» kysyi hän sitten. »Kumpiko
paremmin osaa, ehkä toi Anna neiti alottaa». Laina kävi Annaa
käsipuolesta ja yritti vetää häntä puffettikamarista pirtin puolelle
ja sieltä ulos. He pääsivät jo ovensuuhun keskelle poikatungosta,
kun suutari saavutti heidät ja vakavasti supattaen puhui, että Annan
tosiaan nyt pitäisi pitää se esitelmänsä. »Ei se mikään esitelmä ole»,
tokaisi Anna. »Oli mikä hyvänsä, mutta nyt sen tarttis tulla — vai
lukeeko Laina ensin esityksensä.» Ystävykset keskustelivat katseillaan,
niinkuin ei suutaria olisi ollutkaan ja lähellä seisovat sällit
katselivat julkeasti hymyillen noita tärkeitä henkilöitä. Anna alkoi
siirtyä perälle päin, meni vihdoin pöydän ääreen ja päästi värähtävän
äänensä ilmoille lukemaan kertomusta vanhasta joululehdestä. Muurin
nurkassa syntyi jotakin liikehtimistä ja muuan ääni ölähti: »Älä ny
perkele töni, että mä kuulen mitä toi Jutilan plikka saarnaa».

Laina runoineen oli silloin jo etäällä mäessä pensaitten varjossa.
Sydän löi haljetakseen ja kasvot olivat kylmät, vaikkakin peili näytti,
että ne olivat tummanpunaiset. Ajatukset takoivat valtoinaan: »Tein
kerran retken aatteen valtakuntaan, mua sinne kutsui oma sydämeni»
— toinen puoli ajatusta taas tuijotti tähän tilanteeseen. Valkoiset
kengät, jotka Laina tätä päivää varten oli ostanut, tuntuivat ikäänkuin
liian keveiltä ja hävettäviltä. Alhaalla talossa humisi iltama, josta
ei ollut pelastusta. Anna siellä juuri luki kertomusta. Minä viivyn
kumminkin täällä, ei minua täältä tulla hakemaan. Mitä olisi jos menisi
täältä kotiin ja sanoisi, että tulin äkkiä sairaaksi? Runo vaikeni
päässä ikäänkuin päätöstä odottaen, tai sanoen: »Sittenhän minä olen
suotta olemassa».

Tuntui siltä kuin iltamatalossa olisi tullut hiljaisempaa. Nyt siellä
odotetaan Lainaa runoineen ja valkoisine kenkineen. Odotus venyy, Laina
siirtyy kauemmaksi, niin ettei näe koko taloa. Koettaa vain viivyttää,
vaikka ajatus sanoo, ettei aika kulu juuri ollenkaan.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lopultahan sieltä mäestä oli lähdettävä. Laina pääsi onnellisesti
pirtin ovensuuhun kenenkään huomaamatta, sillä keskellä lattiaa puhui
suutari eloisasti pauhaten: »Tässä tulee sitte pikkusen semmosta
varietti-tanssia, että arvoisa yleisö tietää mitä se on ja tekee vähän
tilaa tähän keskelle, että variettitanssijat pääsevät esitykseensä».

Kamarista tuli joukko kaapuihin, peruukkeihin ja naamioihin verhottuja
olentoja, jotka alkoivat lattialle muodostuneessa silmänteessä
kekkulehtaa niinkuin mielipuolet. Heille lasketeltiin tylsiä sutkauksia
ja suutari nauraa hohotti kohti kurkkuaan. Hauskaahan iltamissa pitää
olla.

Kun variettitanssijat olivat menneet, äkkäsi suutari Lainan ja huusi:
»Missäs se neiti lymmytteli, ohjelma on ohitte jo. Menee nyt pian
lukemaan sen satunsa»...

Laina esitti sydämensä kainon tuotteen sillaikaa kun iltamaväki
jo liikehti tanssihurmassaan. Tanssi melkein alkoi, ennenkuin hän
pääsi runonsa loppuun, sillä pelimanni ei tässä humussa oikein
kuullut lausujan heikkoa ääntä. Vastaan tunkevien sällien välitse
Laina puolipökertyneenä pujottelihe ulos ja suoraan kotiin, jossa
tuntui erinomaisen suloiselta saada yltään kireät liivit ja niiden
suojustimet. Oli myös tyynnyttävää ajatella että oli poissa
iltamapaikalta, jos siellä vielä tulisi tappelu.

Ei siellä kumminkaan mitään tappelua tullut. Enemmän tai vähemmän
päihtynyt iltamaväki tanssi aikansa ja siirtyi sitten jälkivaiheisiin,
joissa kaikkein vähimmin muistettiin, mitä satua Hietikon muorin piika
oli lukenut. Tuskinpa muistettiin Seet Järvisen variettitanssiakaan.

Iltamista oli tuloja toistatuhatta markkaa, vaikka puffetti tuottikin
vähänlaisesti. Ämmät sen kuultuaan ymmärsivät kyllä syyn siihen. Sitä
varten Seet oli siihen virkaan oman ämmänsä toimittanutkin, ettei se
liikoja tuottaisi.




ERÄÄN TALOLLISEN JOULUAATTO


Vistin Miina, iäkäs leski-ihminen ja Vistin O.003 manttaalin veroisen
tilan emäntä ja haltija oli herännyt kissan naukaisuun ja sitä ulos
päästäessään huomannut, että pirtti oli melkoisen kylmä; saattoi
näkemättäkin aavistaa, että vesisanko ovipielessä oli jäähileessä. Ja
kuinkas mahtoi olla lapsi paran laita? Sikeästi se kumminkin nukkui
tuossa sängyn keskipaikkeilla vanhan toppipeiton puolikkaan alla. Oli
täytynyt sovittaa sen makuupaikka alemmaksi sänkyyn, pois oikealta
päänaluselta. Jos sen asetti oikein ylös rinnallensa, niin se potki
puksutti kaiken yötä Miinan hellää sydänalaa. Se on Iitan tyttö, Miina
on sen mummu. Missä lehjannee Iita itse...

Nuo kuivat varvut ja puuntikut muurin holvissa ovat talvisen aamunousun
makupaloja; ne ovat melkein kuin jotain hyvää syötävää. Kun niitä panee
pesään kolmijalan alle, syttyvät ne ensi virityksellä ja niiden toten
palaa pihistävät siinä sitten tuoreemmatkin puut. Ja kahvi kiehuu
täyttäen tuoksullaan lämpenevän tuvan. Akkunaruudut, joissa äsken oli
kuinka vahva jääkarsta, alkavat jo sulaa yläsyrjästään; sillaikaa
kun kahvi selkiää, saa Miina kurkistella sulista paikoista pihalle,
jossa jo on kellanpunertava joulukuun aamu. Savut nousevat taloista ja
jostain on kuuluvinaan reen narinaa. Kas kun makasinkin myöhäiseen. —
Niin, ja tämähän on vielä jouluaatto, heikkarissa. — Nouse pian ny'
plikka sinäkin.

Peiton alla aukesi killelleen kaksi eloisaa pikku silmää katselemaan
pirttiä ja Miinaa, joiden kummankin lukemattomat tutut piirteet
pian häihdyttivät olemattomiin unen monimutkaiset ihanuudet. Pesän
loimottava tuli, jäiset ikkunaruudut ja turvallisesti häärivä mummu
lupasivat tajunnalle riittävää korvausta, pitkän raikkaan päivän
tuhansine tapauksineen.

Mummu toi tassutti omalla kupillaan tilkan kahvia ja puhua ropisi koko
ajan:

»— huomannutkaan minäkään kun makasin puoleen päivään ja on
jouluaattokin eikä meitillä ole vielä mitään jouluksemme hankittuna.
Puetaan nyt ja lähdetään katsomaan, saisimmeko Tiuralta vähän sianlihan
koipea taikka jotain muuta särvintä...» Loppusanoissa oli maanitteleva
sävy.

Se oli kovin mieluinen sanoma Saimalle, pikku tytölle. Pueskellessaan
lämpimiä ryysyjä ylleen hän pakisi samaan tapaan kuin mummukin koettaen
vakuuttaa, että mitäs sitä ihminen jouluna sen kummempia tarvitsee kuin
muinakaan päivinä. Pidettyään sitten pienen vaitiolon päätti tyttö
mietteensä »Ja onhan talo ainakin itsenäinen».

Olisi pitänyt oikeastaan paremmin varoa, mitä sen tytön kuullen puhui,
se kun höpötti kaikki takaisin niinkuin honokraaffi. Ei sen puolesta,
että tytöllä mitään vaarallisia höpötettäviä olisi ollut, mutta —
ajatella nyt tuota sen itsenäisyyden uhoakin. Jos se taas rupeaa sitä
Tiurallakin vohkaisemaan. Ei siitä ainakaan näin jouluaattona auta
muistuttaa — vaikka, sen puolesta, kyllä sen Miina itsekin pian sanoo,
jos liian paljon aletaan pöyhistellä: että ei mua tulla omaan pirttiini
ja omalle maalleni komentelemaan, siitä minä menen hautaan niinkuin
isommastakin säteristä.

Se oli tämä itsenäisyys Miinalle hiukan kaksipäinen asia, joka toisin
ajoin pyrki kaduttamaan, toisin hetkin taas nostatti rintaa ja toi
mieleen pontevia sanoja siltä varalta, että joku alkaisi vanhaan tapaan
häntä antimistaan huomautella. Miinalla oli kyllä aikaisemminkin
ollut hyvät oltavat. Hän asui kylän laidassa mökissään, joka oli
vanha ja lahonut, niinkuin jossakin kirjan kuvassa. Siitä kulki tie
kylän yhteisille perämaille, suvin talvin siinä tapasi isäntiä ja
heidän väkiään ja sai tarjota niille kahvikupin. Ja Tiuran isäntäkin,
vanha ja kitsaan puoleinen äijän käppyrä, toi näin joulun edellä aina
kuorman puita, »että kaffee kiehuu taas tulevankin vuoden». Ja emännät
antelivat väskyyn kaikenlaista suuhun pantavaa. Niin ettei Miina kyllä
pääse moittimaan entistäkään oloaan.

Sitten siinä tapahtui semmoista pientä muutosta. Iita toi tänne tuon
tyttönsä, kun se oli eronnut miehestään ja — sanottiin, ei Miina
tiennyt, mutta sanottiin — ruvennut pitämään huikentelevaista elämää;
sen Miina kyllä tiesi, että se mies oli ollut juoppo ja päissään
pahankurinen. Ja oli kuinka hyvänsä, eihän sitä nyt lasta voinut olla
ottamatta, kun se sitä tänne pyysi ja ensimmältä hiukan sen puolesta
maksoikin. Mutta talolliset olivat toista mieltä. Kaikkinaiset
elämänpuutteet näyttäytyivät nyt useammin, niin että Miinan täytyi
joskus suoraan pyytää jauhokouraa tai suolan murua, kun ei ollut
Iitaltakaan kuulunut. Silloin oli joku emäntä sanonut, ettei tässä
kannattanut ruveta polseviikin mukulaa ruokkimaan, menköön sinne
ihannemaahan, kun on ne tavat muutenkin. Miina oli ottanut tuosta
ryöpystä kelpo lailla itseensä ja sanonut, että kukas kävi lakkokevännä
täällä lypsyä auttamassa ja sen tähden kuunteli tiellä lakkolaisten
haukkumisia ja kuinkas kävi juuri silloin kun valkoiset hyökkäsivät...

— Kyllä ne tiedetään ja pitäisi oleman ainakin minun puolestani
maksossakin, mutta kukas liehtoi Riitialassa punasia tän kylän
talollisten päälle? Se oli Iita sen kultansa kanssa, jonka se nyt
kuuluu jättäneen ja ruvenneen — —

— Hyvästi, äläkä luule että minä sun kätyrikses toista kertaa rupeen,
huusi Miina lähteissään, eikä pää eivätkä kasvojen lihakset hankkineet
vielä maantielläkään löytää tavallista asentoaan, vaan tempoilivat
vihaisesti sinne tänne.

Siitä kohtauksesta se itsenäisyyskin sai alkunsa — vaikkei Miinan
mökki kyllä sen talon maalla ollut. Mutta kun Iita samalla viikolla
kävi Miinaa ja Saimaa katsomassa ja suurilla tuohillaan oli peräti
hellyttänyt mielet, kertoi Miina hänelle emännän haukkumiset. Kyllä
Iita siinä vastata osasi — olisi sopinut olla vaan akan itsensä
kuulemassa. Siinä se itsenäisyyskin sitten puheeksi tuli — taikka
kyllähän Miina sen jo nähnyt ja kuullut oli, että suuret töllit
itsenäiseksi pääsivät, mutta ei hän ikinä olisi uskonut, että semmoiset
tämmöisiä koskivat. Iita ei muuta kuin nauroi semmoisille luuloille
ja sanoi että valtio maksaa hinnan ensiksi ja te saatte maksaa sitten
kun jaksatte, vähitellen — taikka kyllä minä sen maksan, sitten kun se
aika tulee. Vaikkei teitiä nyt tästä poiskaan häädettäisi, mutta tulee
mökille suurempi myyntihinta — —

»— sus siunakkoon, pitääkö mun tää myyräkin?»

»Ei, olkaa nyt vai» — ja Iita selitti tarkoituksensa.

— Ähä, kyllä Miina jo ymmärsi: sitten kun hän kuolee ja Iita on ainoa
perillinen. Mutta Miina tohahti tiukan lämpimällä äänellä:

»Saima mun perii, jos jotakin on, että sen muistatte, että Saima mun
perii, jolllen-ma ennen kuolemaani kuntaan joudu.»

       *       *       *       *       *

Ja niin sitten kävi, että kun Tiuran torppia eroteltiin, niin siinä
olivat Vistin Miinankin paperit haussa. Eikä isäntä sitä niin kovasti
vastustanutkaan — ja mikäs siinä auttoi selvässä asiassa. Tuossa aidan
kulmauksessa hiukan koitti rajaa siirtää, mutta vuokralautakunnan
esimies, Hirvon isäntä, sanoi että mitäs Tiura nyt semmoisista
prenkkaa, eihän tämä tilkku mitään seviottia ole, että sitä senteissä
mitataan. Olivat sitten kahvillakin koko roikka, isäntäkin. Mutta
sen jälkeen ei ole omasta alotteestaan poikennut eikä tavanmukaisia
joulupuita liioin tuonut.

Saima oli ollut Miinan mukana Muikulla silloin, kun emäntä sitä
polseviikin mukulaksi sanoi, ja kuunnellut myös koko ajan Iitan ja
Miinan puhetta itsenäisyydestä. Ei ollut siis ihme, että tyttö sitä
asiaa harrasti.

Kun nyt sivullisilla oli ollut niin paljon tekemistä siitä Miinan
itsenäisyydestä, ei hän ollut tahtonut oikein itselleenkään myöntää
niitä hienoja ja hiljaisia tosiasioita, jotka siitä olivat seuranneet.
Niinpä Tiuran isäntäkin, kun Miina sen sitten kerran kutsumalla kutsui
kahville, oli kyllä yhtä heveli kuin ennenkin, mutta juomasta päästyään
otti markan pussistaan ja laski pöydän kulmalle. Se oli paha ilve se —
eikä puita kuulunutkaan. Siinä oli lähellä Tuomolalla metsää ja sieltä
oli Miina nyt omin lupinsa hiukan otellut maassa olevaa ja muuta risua
— oli ottanut ja hienokseen epäillyt, mitä siitä seuraa. Oli tässä
joulun alla pari kertaa jo Iitallekin kirjoituttanut, mutta mitään ei
ollut kuulunut, ja niin tämä ensimmäinen täysin itsenäinen joulu uhkasi
tulla kuivana mummun ja pienen tytön majaan.

Jouluaaton aamussa oli kumminkin jotain erinomaisen lupaavaa; raikas
pakkasilma, kylä savuineen ja hyväksi ajettu tie toivat noiden kahden
eri-ikäisen paarustajan mieliin oivallista joulutuntua. Juotu aamukahvi
lämmitti ruumista ja aivan kohta he istuisivat ensimmäisen talon
kyökissä — saavat ehkä siellä lisää kahvia tuoreen hyvän pullan kanssa.
Eihän jouluaaton teholle mikään mitään voinut.

Se oli juuri Tuomola se ensimmäinen talo. Lämmintä siellä oli ja
tilavaa ja haisi semmoinen erinomainen käry, jota ei koskaan Vistin
mökissä tuntunut. Se lähti joulukinkusta, jonka kylkeä emäntä
parhaillaan käänsi.

Tästä talosta ei Miina kylläkään ollut koskaan sanottavampia asioinut;
emännällä ei juuri koskaan sattunut olemaan. »Kyllä minä avaisin vaikka
lihakaupan, jos minulla sitä myytäväksi olisi — oli niin emäntä kerran
Miinalle vakuuttanut, kun tämä häneltä sitä lajia kivesti. Nyt oli
kumminkin se puujuttu... Miinasta tuntui, ettei hän voi mennä talon ohi
siitä puhumatta.

»Kyllä minä emännältäkin lihaa ostaakseni pyytäisin, vaikka isännälle
mun kyllä paremmin asiani olis.»

»Vai lihanhimo siihen Miinaan on tullut vanhoilla päivillään. —
Kyllähän tätä tässä nyt on, kun saisi kypsymään. — Vai lihan himo, sano
— »

Sitten se huusi piikaansa ja neuvoi lapsiaan. Oli ilmeistä, että Miina
ja Saima saivat hänen puolestaan siinä istua vaikka Tapaniin asti.

Mutta isäntä tuli sisään, hiukan niinkuin kiireisenä hänkin ja otsa
tutussa kurtussa. Hän puhui joulusaunan lämmityksestä, jonka pelkäsi
pullien ja paistosten tähden jäävän liian myöhäiseen. Ei ottanut
hänkään tuota penkillä istuvaa paria huomioonsa, ennenkuin Miina sanoi:

»Olisin minä isännältä puhunut puita siitä pirttini takaa, mutta
kerkiääkö isäntä sitä aatteleen, näin jouluaattona?»

Isäntä katseli Miinaa hiukan sivulta — hän kuuli paremmin toisella
korvallaan — mutta ei puhunut ensin mitään. Miina hankki sanoa sanansa
uudestaan, kun emäntä ehti sanomaan:

»Tehän olette puhunut puut suoraan pirttiinne. Ette Te enää puhu puita,
vaan tuhkaa.»

»Niin, mitäs Te siinä olette meinanneet, kun Te olette ruvenneet meidän
metsää asumaan?»

»No se kävi nyt, kuulkaas isäntä, sillä lailla, että kun siinä pääsivät
loppuun ne Tiuran puut ennen kun se toi toisia, niin minä sanoin
Saimalle kerran...»

»Niin, niin, kyllä kai Miinalta tarua lähtee, mutta ei sitä saa sillä
lailla mennä talollinen toisen metsään, vaikka se pirtin takanakin on;
semmoisesta rangaistaan.»

»Voi isäntä kulta, kuinka suuri vaiva ihmisillä siitä minun
'talollisestani' on — en minä semmosia olisi ittestäni ymmärtänyt
mutta kun minä olen sen sanonut että Saima mun perii, jos jotakin jää,
niin minä aattelin, että on hänellä mökillä vähän suurempi arvo sitten
myydessä...» Miina itki.

Semmoista se oli siinä talossa. Puista kyllä sovittiin — emäntä vaati
niistä suuren karvakehruun ja keväällä lakaisemaan pihaa. Lihaakin
hän myi, miksei, viisitoista markkaa kilo. Ei, herra-siunakkoon,
Miinalla semmoisia rahoja ollut. Siinäpä se — kyllähän emäntä ne
Miinan ostamiset tiesi... Syödäkseen saivat viipaleen varikakon kanssa
kumpikin. Punoittavina ja neniään niistellen he nauttivat saaliinsa ja
sitten edelleen matkalle.

Nyt poikettiin »omaan taloon», Tiuralle.

Siellä oli joulu jo pitemmällä. Renki kantoi sisään mahdotonta kuusta
— emäntä ja lapset menivät sen perässä saliin, kyökkipiika yksin jäi
Miinan ja Saiman kanssa puhelemaan.

Piika kyseli Iitan asioita ja Miina puhui, vaistomaisesti yhtä
suopealla äänellä, kuin olisi puhunut emännälle. Tai niinkuin
emäntä olisi jossain pielen takana kuunnellut. Tuli siinä hiukan
moitiskeltuakin omaa lastaan, mutta emäntää vaan ei tullut näkyviin.

— Kas kun pakoilee, ajatteli Miina ja sanoi ääneenkin jotain sinne päin
vihjaavaa.'

»Ei suinkaan se teitiä pakoile, mutta kyllä se Miinalle vähän vihainen
on.»

»Vai on vihainen — nii kai — vai vihainen on.»

Kun emäntä sitten hetken päästä tuli kyökkiin, katseli hän yhdessä
piian kanssa Miinan ja Saiman menoa ja piika toimitti, kuinka nätisti
hän oli jouluvieraista selvinnyt. Emäntä palasi sitten takaisin saliin;
vankka, yhä vahveneva jouluaaton tunnelma vallitsi talossa. Navetasta
palasi karjapiika ilmoittamaan, että se kipeä lehmä jo söi ja märehti.
Isäntä olikin juuri saattamassa kotiin eläinlääkäriä.

Vahvenemaan päin kyllä oli Miinan ja Saimankin joulutunnelma, kun he
seisoivat tiellä. Ilma oli aamuisestaan hiukan tahmaantunut; täällä
kylän keskellä oli jouluvalmistusten tuoksu tuntuvinaan raitillakin.
Terhakan ja luottavaisen näköisenä Saima koetti arvata Miinan
aikeita. Tällä hetkellä tytön olento kumminkin lievästi ärsytti
Miinan mieltä — jos hän olisi ollut yksin, olisi hän näitten outojen
vastaanottojen jälkeen mennä toohannut Peltonientä kohden ja koko ajan
puhunut mennessään. Mutta nyt jos sanankin sanoi, puuttui Saima heti
keskusteluun lapsekkaan luottavaisilla huomautuksillaan — tai yhtyi
Miinan moitteisiin omine huomautuksineen.

Sietäisi nyt Iitan nähdä heidät sieltä, missä tänäkin jouluaattona
elelee koreuksineen.

Kun Miina siinä ajatteli Iitaa ja katsoi samalla Saimaa, tuntui hänestä
niinkuin tyttökin olisi ollut hänen puolellaan äitiään vastaan. Hän
höpähti jotain ääneen ja kun Saima kysyi: mitä? niin ärähti Miina: »Ei
sinulle mitään», ja lähti menemään eteenpäin.

Saima arvasi, että nyt mennään Peltoniemeen, josta Miina oli aina
puhunut ja sen emäntää eniten kehunut. Sinne oli kyllä pitkä matka,
mutta Saimasta oli pääasia, ettei vielä palattu kotiin.

       *       *       *       *       *

Siinä on Peltoniemi, yksinäinen takamaan talo mustuneine navetta-
ja tallipolkuineen, kodikkaine rakennuksineen, joiden sisäpuolella
vallitsee vahva peltoniemiläinen henki: hyvä toimeentulo ja lämpöinen
epäjärjestys pirtissä ja pakarissa. Miina tuntee emännän jo tämän
entisiltä päiviltä. Se on aina ollut hyvä ihminen; kaataa pannusta
monta kuppia hyvää kahvia ja leikkaa nisusen vuolut puolta kämmentä
leveiksi; käskee joskus Miinan mennä itsekin jotain jostain ottamaan,
kyselee ja puhelee ihan tasavertaisena keskikylän asioita; nauraa
leveän naurun, kun i Miina ihastelee hänen muinoista muhkeuttaan, joka
nyt kyllä on jo hiukan ränstynyt.

Pahinta kumminkin tällä kertaa on, että emäntä makaa sairaana sängyn
pohjissa. Muutenkin on jouluaatto jo ikäänkuin liian pitkällä tällaista
käyntiä varten. On niinkuin juhlahetken lähestyminen kiihdyttäisi
vauhtiaan. Talossa hankitaan jo saunaankin.

Miina pääsee emännän tykö kamariin ja emäntä koettaa huohotuksensa
lomassa kuvastella kaikkea entistä ystävyyttään Miinaa kohtaan. Se
tapahtuu kumminkin sekavasti: aivan alussa hän jo sanoo piialle, että
tämä antaisi Miinalle sieltä rievää, mutta kun polttokohtaus taas
yltyy, ei hän tule sanoneeksi kuinka monta kakkoa pitää antaa. Kun
kipu jälleen helpottaa, kysyy emäntä jotain aivan vähäpätöistä asiaa
keskikylältä, mutta jaksaa tuskin kuunnella Miinan harrasta vastausta.
Tulee väkisinkin vaitiolo. Miina katselee epäröiden sairasta ja tämä
kysyy:

»Joko te vihtonu' olette? Eiköös siellä jo mahda sauna joutua — menkää
sinne vaan ja sanokaa Marille, että hän antaa teitille ja Saimalle
siellä jotakin syötävää — oi, voi.»

Peltoniemessä Miina ja Saima sitten vihtoivat, nauttivat runsaasti
jouluruokia ja vihdoin lähtivät. Emäntä oli nukahtanut, jotenka sitä ei
sopinut mennä edes hyvästelemään. Lähtiessään Miina huomautti piialle
siitä rievästä ja piika antoi — yhden kyrsän. Semmoista se oli, kun
talosta emäntä kaatui.

       *       *       *       *       *

Yksi vaivainen rieväkakko oli tuolla pahalla parilla mukanaan, kun he
taas ehtoohämyssä paarustivat takaisin mökilleen. Tiukkeneva pakkanen
piti anturein alla joulupakinaansa muistuttaen Miinalle, että tupa on
kylmä ja puut märkiä. Saima marssi urhoollisesti ja koetti silloin
tällöin jaaritella jotain niistä makupaloista, joita oli matkalla
suuhunsa saanut, mutta Miina melkein ärähti, että kaks' niistä, kun
ovat makosi perällä, mutta milläs luulet joulun mentävän, kun ei ole
muuta kun silakkaa ja perunaa ja tää rievän kyrsä.

— Mitäs joulu sen parempia tarvitsee kuin muutkaan päivät? toisti Saima
tuota Miinan omaa virttä.

— Hh, kai-mar se niinkin on, mutta saisi se äitisikin sentään omasta
mukulastansa sen verran pitää, että edes jouluehtooksi jotain
lähettäisi — kun hän niitten porvarien pahuutta aina paasaa — ettei
minun tarvitsisi niiltä kerjustella ja sitä hyvää talollisuuttani
häpäistä.

— No eivätpä nuo näy suuria luovuttaneen.

Se ääni tuli puukopin ovelta, jossa näkyi seisovan joku nainen.
Iitahan se oli, kun lähempää katsoi. Miina oli olevinaan vihainen eikä
näkevinään, kuinka tyttö lähenteli äitiään. Miina oli kyllä Iitan
ensimmäisistä sanoista oivaltanut, ettei se tullut tyhjänä nytkään. Kun
se kerran tuli, oli sillä aina nyytissä mahdottomat tuoliit ja suussa
tavaton rehaaminen ja kerskailu.

Syömisestä ei nyt ollut puutetta eikä — herra hyvästi siunatkoon! —
ei edes juomisesta; sitäkin sillä oli pienessä pullossa sen verran,
että Miinan vähäinen verimäärä pääsi lämpenemään. Miinan silmiin
tulivat vesitipat, kun hän selitti tyttärelleen, että joulu sentään
oli kaikille yhteinen, ettei ollut mitään erityistä porvarien joulua,
vaikka vajavaiset ihmiset joskus paaduttivatkin sydämensä.

Saima kuunteli outoillen heidän puhettaan leikkiessään uudella
tavattoman komealla nukellaan, jonka Iita oli tuonut.




VAPAUDEN TIELLÄ


Oli kyllä syytäkin epäillä jo silloin, kun Hilta siihen kunnankirjuri
Salmiolle tuli, ettei se siinä kauan pysy. Hilta oli hulluimmillansa,
kahdenkymmenen ikäinen sieväpäinen ja sorjavartinen tytönhuiskale, joka
ei siihenastisissakaan palveluspaikoissaan ollut vanhentunut; vasta
pari vuotta oli ollutkin kotoa poissa ja jo ehtinyt käväistä ainakin
viidessä paikassa, välillä aina kotonakin poiketen. Kunnankirjurin Elli
rouva taas oli tarkka ja tiukka ihminen, joka ei sietänyt yöjuoksuja
eikä mitään sinne päin vivahtavaa. »Jos sinulla on sulhanen, oikea
miehinen mies, niin sano se, ja sinä saat seurustella hänen kanssaan
niin vapaasti kuin vaan itse tahdot» — niin kirjurinrouva sanoi
palvelijoilleen. Kaiken lisäksi oli Hilta vielä kirjurinrouvan serkku
ja lapsuuden tuttu; ei siinä mitään kuria voinut pitää. Arvattavasti
rouva juuri tuon sukulaisuuden vuoksi tekikin yrityksen — tahtoi saada
orpanansa paremmille jäljille.

Hilta ehti olla kirjurilla yksitoista kuukautta, mikä oli hänen
tähänastinen saavutuksensa. Paljon hän ehti muuttuakin sinä aikana.
Luultiin jo, että Lintulan Hiltasta ehkä sentään tulee vielä tasainen
kunnon naisihminen. Hän jo saattoi jäädä pois iltamistakin, vaikka ne
pidettiin vallan lähellä, ja taipui orpanansa ohjeisiin vaatteiden
ostossa ja muussakin elämisessä.

Vaivaa siinä kyllä oli ollut Salmion rouvalla, ennenkuin niin pitkälle
päästiin — ja keskeneräiseksihän se kasvatus sitten perästäkin sillä
kertaa jäi. Kun Hilta saapui, oli hän kaikkinensa niinkuin päähenkilö
jostain kansantajuisesta kertomuksesta, jonka rouva äskettäin muisti
jostain lukeneensa. Neidin yllä oli vaatekerta, josta näki, että sen
oli määrä olla sievä, ja oli kai ollutkin varsin hieno siinä kääreessä,
johon ompelijatar oli sen laittanut — mutta tätä maailmaa varten
sitä ei oltu tehty. Tytön muut tavarat olivat kahdessa Itämaisen
tupakkatehtaan pahvirasiassa. Siellä oli sikin sokin nuhraisia
hameita, vanhoja huvipostikirjeitä, kengät, jotka olivat olleet
ruskeat, sukkavarras, jota oli kuumennettu. Hilta oli taas ollut pari
viikkoa köyhän isänsä mökillä lähdettyään kävelemään edellisestä
palveluspaikastaan. Ei ollut tullut siellä pestyä, kun ei ollut
saippuaa eikä rahaa.

— Jaaha, vai semmoinen sinä olet, sanoi rouva. No nyt sinä ensi
työksesi lähdet Ojansivuun ja tilaat sieltä vankan kopan. Käsket tehdä
vahvoista päreistä ja varustaa hyvillä kulmapuilla. Tältä päivältä
saat jo palkan, mutta sinun ei tarvitse vielä tehdä talon töitä.
Paluumatkallasi ostat osuuskaupasta saippuaa ja rupeat sitten pesemään
vaatteitasi.

Hiltasta oli hirvittävän vastenmielistä lähteä, mutta ei kehdannut
juuri vielä vastaankaan sanoa: Mikä kiire niillä kopilla ja pesulla
nyt olisi ollut — olisi sitä tämän päivän saanut muutenkin oleilla ja
paikkoja katsella. Tai jos olisikin käskenyt tavallisiin piian töihin,
mutta kun oitis tuommoisiin — ja mitä minun pesuni ja korini hänelle
kuuluvat — kyllä tämä taitaa minulta pian jäädä. Menen kaupunkiin...

Kun Hilta palasi, ei hänellä ollutkaan saippuaa sitä määrää kuin olisi
pitänyt, mutta oli sen sijaan livekiveä melkoinen annos.

— Mitäs sinä nyt olet ajatellut? Enhän minä sinun livekiveä käskenyt
ostaa — etkä sinä sillä rahalla näitä ole saanutkaan.

— Minä aattelin, että rouva unohti livekiven ja ostin sitäkin. Lupasin
maksaa lopun myöhemmin.

— Ei sinun minua serkkuasi rouvitella tarvitse, mutta muuten minä
nyt nauran sinua. Etkö sinä, hyvä lapsi, sitä tiedä, että meillä ei
_koskaan_ tehdä niitä kumpaakaan: ei käytetä pesussa livekiveä eikä
tehdä kauppiaalla velkaa. Meidän on parasta sopia näistä asioista jo
ensi hetkellä, ettei ruveta suotta alkuunkaan, ellei jatkosta ole
toivoa.

Alkuun kumminkin lähdettiin. Hiltalla oli kohtalaisen hyvä palkka,
mutta — hän ei mitenkään tahtonut saada sitä haltuunsa. Rouvalla ei
sattunut olemaan, kun Hiltan välttämättömästi olisi tarvinnut ostaa
sitä taivaan sinistä vualeeta, jota juuri oli kauppaan saapunut. Hän
olisi tarvinnut puvun palokunnan iltamiin seuraavaksi pyhäksi. Hiltan
kieltä kihelmöi sanoakseen, että jäätiinpäs velkaa piialle, vaikkei
jääty kauppiaalle. Sitä paitsi hänellä oli täysi syy epäillä rouvan
vain juonittelevan, sillä kun tyttö harmissaan sanoi menevänsä iltamiin
vanhalla vualeellaan, asettui rouva sitäkin kovasti vastustamaan.

— Saat iltamarahat ja lisäksi kymmenen markkaa, kun pysyt kotona.

Loppujen lopuksi Hilta sillä kertaa jäikin kotiin, jäi ja tuskitteli.
Mutta seuraavana päivänä hän tavatessaan iltamissa olleita kumminkin
tunsi hienoista iloa siitä, että hänellä oli kaksikymmentä markkaa
enemmän, kun toisilla sen sijaan oli saman verran vähemmän. Vualeepuku
jäi teettämättä. Sen sijaan hän hetkistä myöhemmin osti hyvää
villakangasta ja teetti siitä puvun, joka hänellä oli joltisessakin
kunnossa vielä silloin, kun hän kaupunkiin muutettuaan oli siellä
joutunut ahdinkoon.

Sangen salakavalasti serkku pelaili hänen kanssaan. Säästöpankissa
oli — asianomaisen siitä mitään tietämättä — tili myöskin neiti Hilda
Lintulalla. Sinne ilmestyi joka kuukausi milloin viisikymmentä, milloin
satakin markkaa.

— Meillä on nyt vähän ahdasta aikaa, valitteli kirjurinrouva, mutta
pidä luku saatavistasi — kyllä sinä ne saat. Ja sinulla alkaa nyt olla
vaatetta ylläsi ja lihonutkin olet.

Sillä iällä totutaan helposti. Hilta heittäytyi haaveelliseen
yksinäisyyteen, vietti iltansa vanhojen postikorttiensa parissa ja
noudatteli miten kuten voimakkaamman serkkunsa johteita. Kerran tämä
vaihteen vuoksi alkoi kehoitella Hiltaa lähtemään iltamiin, jotka
pidettiin jossain etäämmällä. Hilta lähtikin ja seuraavana aamuna sopi
rouvan naureskella hänen huonoa tuultaan: iltamissa ei ollut ollenkaan
hauskaa ja muutteesta tuntui rahan tuhlauskin harmittavan. Hilta
tiuskasi:

— Ei minun olisi pitänyt sinun vanhan kitupiikin käskystä lähteä — sopi
sen tietääkin, että sinä sen noidut koko matkan mahdottomaksi.

Niin mentiin ja Hiltan aavistamatta pankkitili kasvoi ja vaatevarastot
lisääntyivät säännöllisesti. Ohjelmassa oli nyt talvipalttoon
laittaminen ja sen yhteydessä käytiin monta pikku sotaa, jotka
kumminkin lopuksi taas päättyivät rouvan voittoon.

— Mitä sinuakin se tarkkuutesi auttaa, kun ei ole edes rintaperillistä,
sanoi Hilta.

— Pitäisikö minun sen vuoksi hajoittaa kaiken maailman tuuliin se keko,
joka on karttunut minun ja mieheni työstä? Mitä varten minä sitten
ollenkaan eläisin, jollen jättäisi maailmaa vähän paremmaksi kuin se
oli minun tullessani?

Näin rouva aina sitoi Hiltan sanoissa, ja Hilta tyytyi osaansa.

Mutta sitten tuli se yksi ja ainoa, jota vastaan kaikki voimat ovat
vähäiset. Tuli rakkaus. Hilta rakastui pulskeaan nuoreen sälliin
Oskariin, joka sattumalta oleili täällä kotonaan, ennenkuin lähti
Tampereelle autokouluun. Hänellä oli jo valmiina säärystimet ja
samettihousutkin ja hän loisteli iltasin kirkonkylän raitilla ja
kahvilassa. Hilta vilkui häntä niin kauan, että oli itse täydessä
tulessa, eikä kulunut kauan, ennenkuin hän sai varmuuden siitä, että
Oskarikin todella oli hänen. Silloin hän tuli vallan toistaitoiseksi.

— Nyt ovat hyvät neuvot tarpeen, mietti kirjurinrouva. Vastustus ei nyt
auta vähääkään, joustavuuteen on turvattava. Täytyy antaa iltamarahat,
muuten saattaa koko rakennus äkkiä romahtaa.

Rahat kylläkin, mutta entäs paitakysymys? Kuinkas se nyt sitten tällä
kertaa järjestyy?

Hiltalla ei tullessaan juuri ollut paidasta tietoa ja oli hänellä
yleensäkin melkoista elävämpi harrastus leninkeihin ja puseroihin,
kuin alusvaatteisiin. Rouva siis oli ostanut liinaa ja teettänyt
niistä muutamia paitoja, mutta — niihin ei pantu »prötyyriä». Itku ei
ollut Hiltalta kaukana silloin kun ne paidat saapuivat. Nyt nuokin
arvon vaatekappaleet olivat kaikki pesemättöminä. Rouva oli jo viikko
sitten siitä huomauttanut ja varannut Hiltalle tarpeellisen ajan,
mutta pesemättä ne vaan olivat jääneet. Rouva puolestaan oli jäänyt
odottamaan juuri tämmöistä tapausta.

Jotenkin hermostuneena Hilta teki iltamavalmistuksiaan. Rouva antoi
hänen rauhassa hääriä, mutta sattui kumminkin menemään keittiöön
äkkiodottamatta kaikkein pahimmalla hetkellä: hän pääsi näkemään yhden
lukemattomista rakkauden sivuseurauksista. Hiltalla oli sylissään
paita, joka itse näytti häpeävän omaa pesemättömyyttään ja sitä
käsittelyä, jonka alaiseksi se nyt oli joutunut. Hiltalla näet oli
sylissään myös sievä mitta uuden uutukaista, osuuskaupan kaikkein
hienointa ja leveintä »prötyyriä», jota hän pareillaan ompeli tuon
suruvoittoisen vaatekappaleen pääntiehen ja käsiaukkoihin. Rouva
käsitti siinä hetkessä, kuinka vähiin hänen kasvatusponnistuksensa
olivat jääneet.

Harmista itkien Hilta kivahti: — jotain täytyy keinotella tämmöisessä
paikassa, kun ei saa palkkojaan, että voisi rääsynsä laittaa ihmisten
tavalla.

Rouva harkitsi parhaaksi poistua mitään sanomatta — ehkäpä vielä tulee
parempi hetki.

Sitä ei kumminkaan tullut. Noissa iltamissa oli Hiltalla niin hauskaa,
että hän seuraavana päivänä vain hyräili tunteellisesti ja näytti
kokonaan unohtaneen eilenehtoolliset prötyyrihuolensa. Rouva oli
hänelle pelkkää ilmaa ja talon työt hän teki ylevän alistuvasti.

       *       *       *       *       *

Uusi suunta kiihtyi nyt vauhdissaan ja niin tuli sitten se paha
perjantai-ilta, jolloin isäntäväen ja palvelijan edut kävivät niin
jyrkästi ristiin, että risahdusta ei voitu välttää. Mikä hirtehinen nyt
sovittikin niin, että kirjurin herrasväellä oli välttämätön mentävä
juuri sinä iltana, jona Sofööri-Oskarikin vietti läksiäisiään. Taloa ei
voitu jättää tyhjäksi, mutta kaikkien olisi pitänyt mennä. Kirjuri itse
sanoi Hiltalle vakavasti, että he lähtivät siksi harvoin iltahuviin,
että Hiltan silloin on muitta mutinoitta jäätävä kotiin. Hilta siis
jäi — tai oli jäävinään. Sillä kun herrasväki oli juuri päässyt pielen
taakse, syti Hilta pellit kiinni puolipuissa, siisti itsensä tavallista
nopsemmin ja livahti tiehensä. Avaimen hän pisti oven vuorilaudan
väliin niin, että sen hyvin piti näkymän.

Kello yksitoista herra ja rouva tulivat kotiin ja aikansa turhaan
ryskytettyään vihdoin huomasivatkin avaimen. He astuivat äänettöminä
sisään, missä sakea häkä hankki työntää heidät selälleen.

— Nyt on mitta täysi, jupisi kirjuri aukoessaan ovia.

Välien rikkuminen ei olisi voinut tulla Hiltalle sopivampaan aikaan:
hän pääsi lähtemään Tampereelle heti Oskarin perässä. Riemu täytti
hänen mielensä, kun hän ajatteli sitä sievää summaa, joka hänellä oli
kirjurilta perimättä. Olivatkin saaneet sillä tavalla pitää toisen
ihmisen rahoja — kohta vuosi kulunut, eikä aivan ainoan kuun palkkaa
ole ajallansa maksettu. Saa nähdä, onko herrasväellä nyt maksaa.

Kyllä oli, mutta erinomaisesti rouva osasi särkeä vielä tämänkin
riemun. Sillä kysyttyään määrää ja sen kuultuaan rouva veti esiin
säästöpankkikirjan.

— Tässä ovat rahasi. Ne on päivälleen saatettu pankkiin...

— Jaa en minä ole velvollinen pankeista palkkojani hakemaan.

— Huomaa, että sinä tänään vielä olet minun palveluksessani ja menet
siis minun käskystäni hakemaan rahasi pankista. Ne ovat siellä
kasvaneet korkoa jonkun verran enemmän kuin prötyyreissä ja vualeissa
— ja muutenkin sopii sinun nyt hyvin tehdä vertailu tulopäiväsi ja
lähtöpäiväsi välillä... Taisi tulla se kori liian pieni sittenkin,
mutta voithan sinä käyttää niitä paperossilaatikoita, jotka sinulla
oli tullessasi... Ja kun sinä nyt menet sinne kaupunkiin, niin muista
korjauttaa nuo kaksi etuhammastasi, niissä on vian alkua...

       *       *       *       *       *

Eipä voi juuri ajatella iloisempaa ihmistä kuin neiti Hilda Lintula,
joka nyt tästä maalaiskirkonkylästä matkusti Tampereelle. Vapaus on
ihmiselle ihana asia, se voi joskus olla leipää ihanampi — ainakin niin
kauan kuin molempia on. Kuinka tavattoman ahdasta olikaan elämä ollut
tähän asti. Selvimmin hän oli sen tuntenut Oskarin seurassa — niinkuin
olisi tuo ahtaus jonain vieroittavana henkenä säteillyt hänestä Oskaria
kohden, tuota raikasta, iloista miestä, joka ei varmaankaan koskaan
ollut mitään kahletta kantanut. Oskarin hymyssä oli joskus ollut
niinkuin pientä säälin värettä ja silloin oli Hilta ajatellut, että
jaksaneeko hän koskaan kasvaa Oskarin rinnalle. Ei ainakaan niin kauan
kuin hän nuhkii kirjurin pienissä nurkissa ja antaa saidan orpanansa
ohjailla pukuasioitaan. — Kaupungissa esiinnytään toisella tavalla, oli
Oskari sanonut. Niinpä niin, siellä _esiinnytään_... Täällä vain ollaan
piikana.

Pankissa oli rahaa hyvän joukon toista sataa enemmän, kuin Hilta laski
olevansa saamassa. — Tämä on semmoinen talo, että täällä lisääntyy raha
itsellään, sanoi johtaja, joka tiesi kirjurinrouvan toimet. Kaikkiaan
siellä oli vähän päälle kahdeksansataa, mutta johtaja puhui, ettei hän
nyt tällä hetkellä antaisi muuta kuin viisisataa — eikö loppu saisi
jäädä edelleen pankkiin? Tai jos neiti niin tahtoo, voi kaupungin
säästöpankki kyllä ottaa vastatakseen tämän lopun ja antaa sieltä
samanlaisen kirjan. On hauskempi jatkaa siellä säästämistä, kun on jo
täältä alku.

Hilta ei paljoa kuunnellut johtajan pakinoita — otti mitä annettiin ja
lähti. Mutta noissa seteleissä oli jokin ikäänkuin kirous sellainen,
että tuntui vastenmieliseltä käyttää niitä tällä vapauden tiellä.
Ne polttivat ja vaivasivat ja hän jo ajatteli, että kunhan pääsee
kaupunkiin, niin vie heidät koko lehut kiireen kaupalla takaisin
pankkiin. Tarpeitahan Hiltalla oli paljon — ei tosin tiettyjä, mutta
sitä jännittävämpiä. Mutta nämä rahat — jollakin tavoin keveämpiä, noin
vain käteen saatuja niiden olisi pitänyt olla. Mieluummin sittenkin
vaikka lainattuja.

Talvipalttoo olisi tarvinnut ostaa — hän vihasi tuota vankkaa
vaatekappaletta, jonka kirjurin rouva oli valinnut. Kun saisi sen
myytyä, mutta kukapa semmoista kaupungissa ostaisi. Sitä paitsi
kirkuivat nuo setelit ihan Salmion rouvan äänellä, että me olemme
sinun kokovuotinen säästösi... Olkoon sillänsä — Hilta vei kaksisataa
pankkiin ja jätti loput taskuunsa, käyttipä heitä sitten mihin
tahansa. Ja kummallista oli, että nuo loput sen jälkeen tuntuivatkin
keveämmiltä, niinkuin olisi niistä jonkun veron maksanut. Tutustuttuaan
lähemmin asunto- ja työtoveriinsa hän tämän johdolla helposti löysi
sopivia tilaisuuksia niiden käyttämiseen; Saipa antaa tälle lainaksikin
viisikymmentä markkaa.

Hilta tapasi Oskarin vasta muutaman päivän päästä ollessaan kävelyllä
ystävättärensä kanssa, — poika tuli illalla vastaan Hämeenkadulla
iloisessa seurassa, jossa oli sekä miehiä että naisia. Hän näytti
hämmästyvän tätä odottamatonta jälleennäkemistä, mutta hämmästyksessä
oli jotain vierasta, niinkuin olisi tämä kohtaus tullut sopimattomasti.
Hän ei heti ymmärtänyt edes kääntyä tervehtimään, vaan jatkoi ensin
matkaansa. Hetken kuluttua sentään tuli takaa päin seuraan liittyen,
ja he saivat selvitellä asiaa kolmannen läsnäollessa. Kohtaus oli
kaikin puolin nolo — semmoista teennäistä leikin tavoittelelua, johon
turvaudutaan silloin, kun kummankin mieli oikeastaan on muualla. Oskari
tietysti luuli, että tyttö oli muitta mutkitta vaan lähtenyt hänen
perässään tänne. Hilta taas vaistosi tämän Oskarin ajatuksen.

— Keitä ne siinä sinun kanssasi olivat? kysyi Hilta.

— Tavallisia trokupoikia vaan — pitääkin lähteä sinne. Kai sitä pian
paremminkin treffataan — missä sinä asut?

Siltä kävelyretkeltä palattuaan Hilta vasta oikein tunsi olevansa
kaupunkilainen. Jos hänellä vielä olisivat ne setelit olleet käsillä,
olisi hän heti mennyt ja sittenkin ostanut sen talvipalttoon. Nyt hän
meni ja osti vain lakin ja päällyskengät. Hilma Hakala, ystävä ja
asuintoveri, auttoi häntä valinnassa, kykenipä vielä lyhentämään sitä
viidenkymmenen markan lainaansakin kahdellatoista markalla, kun Hiltan
rahat sen verran puuttuivat. Loppu jäi seuraavaan kevääseen ja sitten
edelleen, kun Hilma eräänä yönä äkkiä katosi...

Kohdatessaan uudelleen Oskarinsa Hilta selvästi huomasi, että Oskaria
tosiaan vaivasi tämä hänen äkillinen kaupunkiin tulonsa. Oskari alkoi
heti puhella, että täällä on vaikea yhtäkkiä saada työpaikkaa ja
rahaakin kuluu paljon. Häneltäkin on mennyt niin ja niin — täytyi jo
vipata yhdeltä huijupojalta, vaikka kyllä niittenkin kanssa saa varansa
pitää. Mutta Hiltapa selitti, että hänellä jo on työpaikka ja että
hän sentään kykeni hiukan ostamaankin — »että-mä herralle paremmin
kelpaisin», lisäsi hän ja tunsi, kuinka hyvää nuo sanat tekivät. Hän
ilmoitti vielä, etteivät hänen rahansa suinkaan näihiinkään kaikki
menneet. — »Tuossa talossa on kanssa», sanoi hän veikeästi viitaten
pankkirakennukseen, jonka ohitse he juuri kulkivat. Näin sanoessaan hän
tunsi, kuinka noista pankissa olevista rahoistakin yhtäkkiä katosi se
ahdistava paino, joka niiden mukana oli maalta seurannut. Oli hauska
ne sieltä minä päivänä tahansa ottaa, jos Oskarin kanssa niin tulisi
puhuttua.

Heidän kesken muodostui nyt itsestään semmoinen tapa, että kohtauksista
ei sovittu etukäteen. Hilta lähti illalla Hilman kanssa ulos ja
kummankin mielessä sykki onnen aavistelu. He poikkesivat tuttuun
kahvilaan, jossa poikien myös oli tapana istua. Jos nämä olivat siellä,
virisi pöytien välille hauska kiusoittelu, jota jatkettiin tuntikausi,
kunnes jompi kumpi seura ensin lähti, tytöt kauheasti kikattaen ja
yhtäkkiä poiketen poikien edeltä johonkin uuteen paikkaan: toiseen
kahvilaan tai eläviin kuviin, Vasta myöhemmin antauduttiin yhteen ja
tultiin milloin poikien, milloin tyttöjen kamariin.

Joskus oli tiedossa hauskat iltamat. Tytöt pysyivät näkymättömissä,
he eivät tahtoneet tietää poikien aikeista — oli suloista tehdä
valmistuksiaan pienessä jännityksessä. Hilta kävi pankissa — hän tahtoi
kerrankin laittaa itsensä oikeaan kuntoon, nyt kun hän jo ymmärsi ne
asiat. Jokin vaisto taisi kuiskata, että tällaisia laitoksia ei niillä
rahoilla enää pitkälle jatkettaisi, mutta — saihan hän hyvää palkkaa
ja nämä pankkirahat nyt olivat muutenkin semmoisia kuin olivat...
Silkkipusero ja kiiltokengät — Hilma ymmärsi varsin hyvin, että hän
nyt tuli olemaan komeimpia tyttöjä, mitä siellä iltamissa oli. Ja niin
olikin asian laita. Ystävättäret tulivat paikalle aivan alussa, ja
Hiltalla oli kolme hyvää poikatuttua, kun Oskari saapui. Hilman poika
ei tullut perästäkään, mutta se näytti häntä pikemmin ilahuttavan kuin
surettavan. Hilma oli joskus niin kummallinen — ei Hilta aina voinut
sen mieltä ymmärtää.

Hilta pysyi Oskarinsa kanssa ja loppupuolessa Hilma kuiskasi Hiltalle:

— Mene sinne vaan poikasi kanssa, minä menen muualle enkä tule
ennenkuin aamulla. Morjens vaan...

Se olisi ollut ihana yö eikä aamussakaan olisi ollut mitään vikaa.
Kallis silkkipusero oli tosin surkean näköinen ja kiiltokengissä
oli pahoja naarmuja, mutta mitäpä niistä tällä aamuhetkellä. Mieli
souteli ihanassa jälkitunnelmassa, ei ollut katumuksen hetki tämä. —
Mikä onkaan minun ikäni? Kaksikymmentä yksi vuotta — ja tässä ovat
käsivarteni... Hyvin olisi kaikki ollut, ellei juuri sinä pyhäaamuna
olisi tullut se vastenmielinen kirje.

Se oli vastenmielinen heti ensi näkemältä — osoite kankeata
maalaiskäsialaa. Ajatus kieltäytyi kaikesta arvailusta — onneksi ei
Hilma vieläkään ollut tullut, saattoi avata sen yksinänsä.

»Rakas tyttäreni, nyt kirjoitan sinulle...»

— Mitä? Alla oli »isäsi Davit Lintula», mutta eihän isä osaa
kirjoittaa. Kukahan tätä on törkkinyt?

»...ja ilmoitan, että olen muuton voinu hyvin, mutta nyt olen jo kaks
viikkoo maannu sängysä kipeenä ja minä näin sen valo kuvan jonkas
lähetit santralle vaikkes mulle lähettäny ja aattelin sitte että kun
kuulin Salmion Prouvalta että sinulla oli nätisti kassasa rahaa kus
lähdit niin aattelin että jos sinun passais lähettää hiukan vanhalle
isälles kun on kansa joskus Sinua muistanu...»

Se oli se varhaiskeväinen sunnuntaiaamu. Ilma oli kirkkaan suojakas,
kyyhkyset kuhertelivat naapuritalon räystäällä. Hilma tuli kotiin
»kivalta» retkeltään ja heittäytyi heti vaatteissaan sängyn päälle
nukkumaan.

Ajatus haki vaistomaisesti jotain nykyhetkistä harkittavaa. Hän otti
peilin ja alkoi tarkastella hampaitaan — keskimmäisissä ylähampaissa
oli vika ehtinyt jo pitkälle. Jos ne katkeavat, on hänen muotonsa
kamala. Sitähän se oli Salmion Ellikin jo silloin lähtiessä, kauan
sitten huomauttanut — Salmion Elli, jolta isä oli kuullut, että —
äsh... Kylläpä se osasi tuo ihminen kuorsata ja hossata. Missä oli
mahtanut yönsä viettää — missä itse vietin? — Oskarihan on minun
sulhaseni, nyt entistä varmemmin... Mutta jos se jättää? — Nuo hampaat
on todella korjattava... täytyy ottaa rahaa pankista... sitä rahaa,
jota Salmion Elli... jolta isä on kuullut, että...

Hirmuisen kallis silkkipusero ja kiiltokengät olivat yhä siinä eikä
tehnyt mieli edes niitä siitä pois nostaa... Monen maalaistytön on
käynyt täällä hullusti, mutta enhän minä ole sellainen maalaistyttö
nyt enää... Mikä minä olin silloin, kun Salmion Elli vikitteli minua
pysymään poissa iltamista — ja mitäs ne semmoiset iltamat näitten
rinnalla olivatkaan? Oskari vakuuttaa, ettei minulle täällä mitään
kummia tapahdu, niin kauan kuin hänen tuttunaan pysyn. Pian se pääsee
autokoulusta ja sitten voidaan mennä naimisiin... Pyhänä ei pankki ole
auki, enhän minä tänään voi saada itsekään... Isä on kipeänä, koko
tämänkin päivän hän siellä kotona... mutta enhän minä tänään mitään
saa, pääsen tuskin illalla ulos... Ja hampaat on laitettava ja Oskarin
kanssa täytyy puhua vakavasti siitä asiasta, se oli sellaista köykäistä
viime yönäkin...

Tästä keväisestä sunnuntaiaamusta ja -päivästä muodostui Hiltan
tietämättä eräänlainen taitekohta hänen kaupunkielämäänsä. Nuo hätäiset
hyvätpäätökset olivat oireita siitä, että jotain nyt oli luisumassa
jonnekin. Hänen pohjimainen vaistonsa kuiskasi, että päätökset
jäävät täyttämättä sittenkin, vaikka pankki on auki ja lääkäri ottaa
vastaan. Hän oli olevinaan niinkuin ei olisi isänsä kirjettä koskaan
saanutkaan, hän torjui ne kotoisten teitten ja nurkkien kuvat, jotka
aurinko loihti mieleen aina kun tuon kirjeenkin... Huomenna kävi jo
helpommin. Sitten jonain päivänä tuli kirje myös Salmion Elliltä,
kirjurinrouvalta. Silmät lukivat sen läpi todeten siinä samoja asioita,
mutta mieleen se ei pystynyt. Tuntui melkein siltä kuin olisi varkain
lukenut toisen kirjettä. Hauskuus oli yhä helposti saatavissa, ehkäpä
entistä helpommin, mutta iloa ei ollut muissa kuin noissa tunkeilevissa
kuvissa, jotka luonto torjui.

Neiti Lintula oppi hyvin tuntemaan kaupungin kahvilat ja elävätkuvat
ja kesän tullen myöskin Pyynikin puolen soittoineen ja autoineen. Hän
liikkui jo ulkosalla muittenkin kanssa kuin Oskarin, ei enää kysytty
hänen säästöjään — oli niitä, jotka tarjosivat. Oskari oli koulunsa
päätettyään ruvennut oikein sofööriksi ja pysyi usein näkymättömissä
monta päivää; oli ollut pitkillä matkoilla herroja kyydissä. Kerran
hän tuli odottamatta Hiltan asuntoon, päissään ja raivon näköisenä,
kävi sanaa sanomatta Hiltaa kurkusta... kyökkikunnan akat kuulivat
vain Hiltan itkuisia kuiskauksia. Sinä iltana Hilta tosiaan itki
kunnollisesti: ei hän niillä Pyynikin retkillään ollut mitään pahaa
tehnyt — »totta-ma jossain käyn, kun sinä olet poissa päiväkausia».

— Niin minä olen ja tulen olemaan.

Raa'asti Oskari puhui hänen mätänevistä hampaistaankin. Kului
pari tuntia ennenkuin päästiin entiseen hempeyteen, mutta vakavat
tulevaisuuden suunnitelmat jäivät sillä kertaa, kuten ennen — ja
vastakin.

Noina viikkoina Oskari muutenkin muuttui yhä salaperäisemmäksi. Hän
puhui autopulaakististaan, puhui vekseleistä ja niiden uusimisista.
Noitui pankkeja, jotka ensin antavat auliisti rahoja ja sitten
kiristävät. — Mutta mistäs ne osakkailleen voittoja jakaisivat.

— Oletkos koettanut säästöpankkia? sanoi Hilta jotain sanoakseen.

— Phöh, äänsi Oskari halveksivasti ja murjotti edelleen. Eikä taas
tämän jälkeen ollut muutamaan päivään näkyvissä.

Kun hän sitten vihdoin tuli, oli hän kovin kiihtynyt ja vaati Hiltalta
heti kaikki rahat, mitä tällä suinkin oli. Pankissa oli vielä
kaksisataa ynnä korot, joita kumminkaan ei vielä oltu laskettu eikä
siis voitu maksaakaan. Rahat saatuaan Oskari huristi autolla pois
luvaten myöhemmin selittää kaikki.

Se selitys jäi kokolailla myöhäiseen — se on vieläkin antamatta ja
Sofööri-Oskarin puolesta se pysyykin antamatta. Eräänä kesäkuun
yönä tapahtui kuitenkin tämän näytelmän nopea ja perinpohjainen
loppuselvittely.

Siitä tehtaasta, jossa Hilma ja Hilta kävivät, vähennettiin alkaneen
pulan vuoksi työväkeä, jolloin heidätkin molemmat sanottiin irti.
Sovitettiin niin, että jälkimmäinen irtisanomisviikko tuli lomaviikoksi
ja sitä nämä neitoset nyt viettivät. Hiltan mieleen oli tullut, että
pitäisi kai käydä maalla, mutta isän ja Salmion rouvan kirjeet tulivat
samassa mieleen ja hän torjui koko ajatuksen. Hilma oli ruvennut
viettämään yhä säännöttömämpää elämää ja oli nykyään enää harvoin öitä
kotona. Olipa muutaman kerran yrittänyt tuoda jotain hämäriä seuroja
kotiinkin, mutta olivat kyökkikunnan akat tällöin nostaneet pelottavan
melun.

Hilta oleili jo iltojakin yksin kotosalla, raukeana elämäänsä eteenpäin
ajatellen — ja joskus jo hiukan taaksekin päin. Katujen ja puistojen
valkeus ja vehmaus saivat liikkujatkin näyttämään toisenlaisilta —
niinkuin hiljalleen kävellessään olisivat vain muistelleet menneitä
talvi- ja kevätkuukausia. Oskaria ei näkynyt, autoasema oli tyhjä...
Hilta asteli kotiin kamariinsa ikävöimään, jotain...

Kahdentoista aikaan kuului melua kadulta, talon kohdalta. Hilta meni
akkunaan katsomaan. Siellä oli joukko miehiä ja kaksi poliisia Hilman
ympärillä. Kaksi miehistä oli juovuksissa ja poliisit yrittivät
kuljettaa niitä pois, toiset kaksi, jotka olivat selviä, pitivät kiinni
Hilmasta. Lopulta siihen tuli ajurikin ja toinen juopuneista pantiin
siihen. Hilma itki niiden toisten käsissä, kunnes kaikki lähtivät.

Haaveellinen yö oli äkkiä saanut eloa...

Seuraavana aamuna olivat ne samat miehet Hiltan kamarissa.

— Te olette samaa sakkia kuin Hakalakin, teidän on kanssa käytävä
konttoriin. Olette myös vetelehtinyt öisin miesten kanssa.

Jotain tuttua mutta tähän asti muistamatonta jymähti Hiltan tajuntaan.
Vasta hetken päästä hän sai sanottua:

— Olen minä sulhaseni kanssa.

— Kuka se muka on?

— Oskari Riutta, autonkuljettaja.

— Jaa — sehän se on ollut poikaa. Yksi heila parkui sen piilin perässä
niin että hankki järki mennä viime yönä kun se tapettiin.

— Kuka tapettiin?

— Sama Riutta juuri.

Hiltan hätä ja epätoivo vaikutti rauhoittavasti etsiviin. Kyökkikunnan
vaimot vakuuttivat myös, ettei Hiltassa täällä ole mitään huonon elämän
merkkejä havaittu ja että hän todella oli sen soföörin varma morsian.
Ankarin varoituksin poliisit poistuivat, mutta sanoivat mennessään,
että Hiltaa voidaan kuulustella murha-asian yhteydessä.

Päivän sanomalehdistä Hilta sai tiedot asiasta. Murhaaja ja murhattu
lienevät olleet jonkinlaisessa autoyhtiössä keskenään ja sekavien
raha-asioittensa vuoksi riitaantuneet, jolloin toinen iski toista
tikarilla. Näin on kertonut murhatun morsian, joka tapauksen sattuessa
oli hänen kanssaan ajelulla. Molemmat ovat muuten olleet tunnettuja
huijareita.

Murhatun morsian...

Hilta sai käydä poliisikamarissa itkien vakuuttamassa, ettei hän ollut
tavannut Oskaria sitten, kun tämä oli häneltä rahat tahtonut. Se
uskottiin. Kehoitettiin vain palaamaan kotiseudulleen nyt, kun työtkin
ovat loppuneet.

Pankissa olivat ne laskemattomat korot vielä jälellä. Niillä Hilta
nyt pääsi matkustamaan, selvittyään hädin tuskin omastaan ja Hilman
vuokrasta. Erään tutun torpparin rattailla hän lähti ajaa nytkyttämään
kotipitäjäänsä. Matka tuntui näin neuvoin nyt paljoa viehättävämmältä
kuin junalla ja laivalla, joilla myöskin olisi sopinut lähteä. Oli
niinkuin olisi päässyt pikemmin pois siitä, mistä hän nyttemmin
halusikin vain pois.

       *       *       *       *       *

— Jaaha, vai semmoinen sinä _nyt_ olet, sanoi kirjurin rouva, kun Hilta
taas istui hänen keittiössään. — Onpa korisi säilynyt eheänä, mutta
paidat näkyvät olevan samassa kunnossa kuin olivat lähteissäsikin. Ei
mar sentään — prötyyriä näkyy olevan... Ja hampaasi olet sittenkin
päästänyt tuolla tavalla menemään.

Hän sai nyt rauhassa puhella, ei Hilta tiuskinut eikä nakellut
niskojaan. Matka Tampereelta oli kestänyt siksi kauan nytkyttää, että
kyyneleet olivat monta kertaa ehtineet kierähtää silmänurkkiin ja
siten yhdessä väsymyksen ja kesäisen hempeyden kanssa pehmittää hänen
luontonsa perin pohjin. Kun hän kyytimieheltään kuuli, ettei Salmiolla
tällä hetkellä ollut palvelijaa — ellei nyt eilen tai tänään ollut
tullut — niin poikkesi Hilta sinne niinkuin kotiinsa.

Ja aivan samoin kuin viime kerralla ensi työksi laitettiin kori, niin
laitettiin nyt hampaat — tehtaalle oli keväällä tullut hammaslääkäri,
sinne sai Hilta nyt lähteä yllään Salmion rouvan paita ilman prötyyriä,
kun omista ei ollut päälle pantavaa. Sieltä palattuaan sai tytär lähteä
isäänsä katsomaan. Hän sai kuulla ukolta itseltään, että Salmion rouva
oli häntä kivun aikana autellut, niin ettei sentään mitään ollut
puuttunut.

— Saa nähdä, aikookohan sitten nyt sinulta kiskoa niitä takaisin, sanoi
ukko huolestuneella äänellä. — Kai ne minulta kumminkin maksamatta
pysyy.

Hiltan elämä kirjurilla jatkui sitten taas ulkonaisesti entisen
laatuisena livekiveen, prötyyriin, vualeihin ja velan tekoon nähden.
Salmion rouva karttoi tarkoin kaikkia kyselyjä ja varjeli Hiltaa
kyselijöiltäkin — Hilta sai olla melkein niinkuin itse tahtoi. Ei
tullut riitaa edes iltamiin menoista, sillä Hilta ei niihin nyt
ollenkaan pyrkinyt.

Ei heillä ollut puhetta edes palkasta, ennenkuin kuukausi tuli täyteen.
Rouva tuli silloin rahatukko kädessä Hiltan luo ja sanoi:

— Kuinkas nyt sitten tehdään — en minä mielelläni maksaisi sinulle sen
enempää kuin viime vuonna. Mutta minkämoisille palkoille sinä siellä
kaupungissa olet tottunut?

Pankkiin panosta ei rouva nyt puhunut ollenkaan. Kun Hilta ei hänelle
mitään vastannut, antoi hän rahat ja sanoi:

— Ehkä vaitiolo on myöntymisen merkki — ja meni pois.

Rahat kädessä Hilta puhkesi hiljaiseen itkuun — eihän sille mitään
voinut, tuli niin kovasti kaikki mieleen. Seuraavana päivänä hän
hartaasti vei rahansa säästöpankkiin, veipä niin tyystin, että joutui
pian pulaan. Silloin sanoi kirjurin rouva:

— Älä sinä nyt rupea itseäsi kiusaamaan. Ei sitä varten eletä, että
säästetään — saiturit niin tekevät.

Rouva jatkoi esitelmäänsä pitemmällekin, kunnes Hilta vihdoin ärähti:

— Ei sinun tapojasi kanssa kukaan taida.

Mutta hän hymyili sitä sanoessaan lämmintä ja kiitollista hymyä.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hilta oli nyt kunnankirjurilla kaksi vuotta yhtä mittaa. Toisen vuoden
loppupuolella tapahtui hänen toinen itkemisensä, eräänä keväisenä
iltana, kun nuorisoseuran talolla oli teatterinäytäntö. Muuan mies tuli
häntä sinne noutamaan — nuori koneenkäyttäjä, joka äskettäin oli saanut
paikan suuressa tamperelaisessa tehtaassa. Hän ei ollut puhunut Elli
rouvalle mitään koko asiasta, mutta kun hän näki Saarisen tulevan — se
oli miehen nimi — ailahti hänen mielensä niin hyväksi, että vedet taas
herahtivat, niinkuin silloin ensimäistä palkkaa saadessa.

Pian he sitten menivätkin naimisiin ja muuttivat Tampereelle.
Mutta vallan toisilla edellytyksillä tämä Hilta nyt saapui tuohon
nuoruutensa tuttuun pesään. Niinkuin kauempaa, hyvin kaukaa, hän
katseli kahviloita, eläviäkuvia ja muita — autoja hän aivan erikoisesti
kavahti. Siitäkin hänen mielensä oli hyvä, että heidän asuntonsa sattui
olemaan vallan toisella puolella kaupunkia.

Niinkuin jokin ihmepäivä oli se, kun Salmion Elli sitten kerran aikojen
päästä tuli nuorta paria katsomaan. Hilta kunnioitti nyttemmin kovasti
tuota hiukan kirpeätä muijaa, jonka ohimoilla jo alkoi näkyä iän
kuuraa. Salmion rouva kulki terhakkana heidän huoneissaan ja tutki
kaikki paikat niinkuin mikäkin tarkastaja eikä suinkaan säästänyt
neuvojaan eikä huomautuksiaan. Mutta kun Hiltan muutamanviikkoinen
esikoinen sitten heräsi ja äiti nosti sen rinnalle, kelpasi hänen sanoa
tuolle viisaalle lapsettomalle orpanalleen:

— Mutta mitäs sinä tähän tiedät?

Salmion rouva painui tällöin ikäänkuin hiukan pienemmäksi. Hän
nytkähytti vain vähän päätään ja hymyili mielevästi.




PALUU

Historiallinen kertomus vuodelta 1920.


Vanha, miespolvien käyttämä tie puikkelehtii pitkin kevätkesäistä
korpimaisemaa. Vanhaa on kaikki, mitä siinä näkyy: asumukset, metsät
ja maat. Elpynyt vihannuus on niinkuin lasten koristelua naavaisten
puitten ja harmaitten seinien vaiheilla — pian se kuihtuu, mutta
miespolvien takaiset elämän perusmuodot jäävät. Tämä on kaikkein
vähäpätöisin tie ja tienoo, mutta se voi askel askeleelta olla yhä
sisältörikkaampi, esimerkiksi semmoiselle miehelle, jonka koti ja
lapset ovat tien takana ja joka ei ole niitä nähnyt vuosikausiin. Niin
oli nyt laita, kevätkesällä 1920. Eräänä lempeänä iltapuolena asteli
tuota tietä juuri semmoinen mies.

Hän ei ollut nähnyt maisemaa eikä maisema häntä kolmatta vuoteen ja
viime näkemälläkin, eräänä himmeänä maaliskuun yönä vuonna 1918, oli
miehellä melkoinen kiire pois tämän maiseman piiristä. Nyt oli siitä
silloisesta vauhdista muistona masentunut ja kaikin puolin kulunut
ulkomuoto, josta miehen entiset piirteet vain heikosti häämöittivät.
Ei näyttänyt enää palaajalla olevan samaa kiirettä kuin oli ollut
lähtijällä. Häntä olisi voinut luulla suureksi luonnon ihailijaksi,
sillä hän istahteli tavan takaa, ärsytellen pesiviä rastaita, joille
tämmöinen ihmisen liikkuminen oli outoa. Ja vaikka miehessä ei ollut
mitään kehitettyä runollisuutta, ei hänen herkistynyt tajuntansa tällä
kertaa voinutkaan torjua muutamia hentoja vaikutelmia. Puron lirinä oli
uneliaan onnellista ja lahonnut raja-aita näytti johtavan unelmansa
vuosikymmenien takaa. Näitä mies tahdottomasti katseli, sillaikaa kun
varsinaisten ajatusten pyörre väsähti ja seisahti. Kaiken vaikutelman
ydin ja ihme oli siinä, ettei maiseman hengessä tuntunut jälkeäkään
siitä silloisesta. Oli jotain herttaista siinä ajatuksessa, että
tämänkin tien takaa oli sodittu.

Mies otti taskustaan armahduspassin ja seurasi silmillään siinä olevia
painettuja ja kirjoitettuja rivejä. Tässä minä palaan sotaretkeltäni
ja tämä paperi on kädessäni, nämä vaatteet ylläni. Niitäkö varten minä
taistelin? En — enkä minä taistelusta tulekaan. Taistelut ovat kaukana
niinkuin unen maassa, eikä mikään, mikä nyt on, koske niitä. Taistelu
oli vain suurta hurmaa — olikohan se mitään muuta? Köyhälistöllekö
valta? Valta oli kaukana joillakin, joista minä en tiennyt mitään ja
täällä oli valta Rinnellä. Kenellä lienee nyt valta — jollakin se
ainakin vielä hyvin vahvasti on. Tuntuu tänne asti, että kaikkien on
vain nähtävä valta eikä saa olla niinkuin on. Niinkuin varkain istun
tässä paperi kädessä — tuo kirkas taivas ulottuu kauas yli tämän korven
ja siellä on saman taivaan alla valtaa...

Istuvan miehen silmät juuttuivat yhteen kohtaan; oli niinkuin olisi
huimannut tämä aatosten suunnaton outous. Että nyt oli jäänyt pois
se suuri ja kauhea seikka, jonka keskellä hän niin kauan oli ollut
ja hengittänyt, ettei mitään siitä näkynyt tähän hiljaiseen korven
aukeamaan. Onko tästä alkamassa joku uusi saman tapainen, johon on
mentävä yksin, ilman toverijoukkoja? Kipeä tyhjyyden tunne pusersi
rintaa, kun hän nousi mättäältään ja alkoi hitaasti liikkua sinne päin,
missä tiesi kotimökkinsä tulevan näkyviin seuraavasta aukeamasta.

Ympäröivän maanpinnan ja oman entisyyden mitättömimmät pienoisseikat
pyrkivät yhä lähemmäksi — ei minään onnellisina ja rauhoittavina, vaan
niinkuin unohdetut tuttavat, jotka vaativat tiliä jostakin. Olisiko
hänen pitänyt pysyä täällä paikoillaan? — ja jos niin olisi tehnyt,
niin kuinka nyt kaikki olisi? Toisin olisi — mutta millä lailla toisin,
sitä ei mielikuvitus kyennyt alunkaan aprikoimaan. Nämä äänettömät
vastaan tulijat tässä paluumatkan viimeisillä tutkaimilla, ne vaan yhä
kiinteämmin vaativat tunnustamaan oman suuren merkityksensä kaiken
sen suuren rinnalla, joka jäi taakse ja nyt askel-askeleelta tuntui
kutistuvan yhä vähäpätöisemmäksi. Paluuhetken jännitys kiihtyi sisältä
päin, niinkuin lähdön jännitys oli kiihtynyt ulkoa päin...

Nyt — nyt asumus tuon puunjuuren kohdalta pilkahtaa näkyviin. — Minä
ajattelin tästä hetkestä jotakin, paljonkin, mutta että se olisi
tämmöinen, sitä en ajatellut. Lyövätkö hetket yhteen, silloinen kuohuva
epätoivo ja tämä — eikö välillä oleva merkitse mitään? Olenko minä
ollut tässä koko ajan? — ollut tässä enkä päässyt estämään...

Kyyneleet, nyt ne tulivat, ilmestyivät sinne, minne ne ihmisellä
ilmestyvät, ja kerran vauhtiin päästyään ei itku enää ollut
hillittävissä. Mieli riehutti nyt omia hajallisia kysymyksiään ja
hillittyjä tuskiaan sinne tänne. Omiin valtoihinsa kerran päästyään
ne lyhyessä ajassa niinkuin luonnon voimat hakeutuivat omiin uomiinsa
ja saavuttivat jonkinlaisen tyhjän tasapainon. Asumus tuli näkyviin
niinkuin mikä tahansa muukin mökki matkan varrella, niinkuin ei
olisi tiennyt siitä mitään. Itku ei ollut tuonut tietoa, se oli vain
kirvoittanut epätietoisuuden...

Mies nousi, veti syvään värisevää henkeään, astui rauhallisesti
veräjästä ja lähti matalien peltosarkojen välitse suoraan pirttiä
kohden. Jännitys tuntui kyllä vieläkin, mutta se oli nyt tasaista ja
luonnollista. Lähtöhetken tuttu mielikuva pysyi pysymistään: vaimo
jäi täysin avuttomaksi, kun ei voinut lähteä mukaan muutaman viikon
vanhan lapsensa kanssa — nuori kaunis vaimo, jonka kanssa mies oli
paljon riidellyt ja jota hän oli paljon rakastanut. Niin hän silloin
jäi, ja astuessaan nyt pihaan tiesi mies vaimon ja lapsen täällä
vieläkin olevan ja elävän, noiden seinien sisällä tai jossain tässä
ihan lähellä. Hän tiesi — tai paremminkin: jokin järkähtämätön _vaati_
häntä tietämään enemmänkin, mutta sitä enempää mieli nyt kiihkeämmin
kuin koskaan kieltäytyi omaksumasta. Äskeinen selventävä itkukaan ei
ollut saanut sitä seikkaa selvenemään. Miehen jo oven rivasta vetäessä
se vielä taisteli vastaan.

Kun pirtin sekava sisältö hänelle samassa aukeni, ei se tehnytkään
häneen mitään erikoista vaikutusta. Kaikessa, mitä hän näki ja tajusi,
oli omituisen viileä vierauden tuntu.

Vielä tuvan sisässäkin, ihan tosiolevaisen läheisyydessä hänen
luontonsa ponnisti vastaan; hän koetti olla näkemättä mitään muuta
kuin lastansa. Se oli likainen, repaleinen tyttö, jonka kasvoilla
asui varhainen, tylsä raakuus. Se katseli miestä suu ammollaan,
muutti sitten paikkaa ja jäi siihen taas samoin katselemaan. Ankara
todellisuus otti häikäilemättä sen paikan, jota unelmatkin olivat
hienotunteisesti karttaneet tänä kolmatta-vuoden aikana kaiken saastan
keskellä: isä oli koko ajan kuvitellut lastansa vain semmoisena kuin
hän sen silloin maaliskuun yönä jätti nukkumaan.

Mutta täytyihän miehen lopulta jollakin lailla suhtautua siihenkin,
jonka tieto tiesi, vaikkei mieli omaksunut. Sängystä riepujen sisältä
kuului vakahisen lapsen vikinää. Mies kuuli äänensä kysyvän tytöltä:

— Kenenkäs tämä on?

— Te on meilän äilen ja Mohlike-Juttin poika. Ei itä taanu poikaa,
mutta Jutti tai.

— Kuka se Mohlike-Jussi on?

— Te on temmonen taatananmoinen lemotuu — leitutälli te on.

Pesän edessä hääri vanha käsnänaamainen ämmä, jonka mies tunsi vaimonsa
äidiksi ja joka koko kohtauksen ajan piti yhtämittaista motkottavaa
pakinaa.

— Joko punikki ny palaa kansanopistosta — joko on jatkokurssit käyty,
vai viäkö tekee miäli porvarien kansa pyssysille.

— Ku-ma sen sanonki, ettei tartte mennä herrojen kansa marjaan —
min olen ikäni tyätä tehny ja tyästäni eläny — mutten lähle kotooni
herrojen asioille — e-he-hen. —

— Neh, samak-konstit täälä on Valkosten valtakunnasa ku punastenki —
ihmisiä tehlään joh toisia tapetaan — ei porvarikaa niin tyynni tapa,
ettei tarpeeseen löyletä.

Ämmä jäi vielä jatkamaan tolkutonta motkotustaan, kun mies hiljaa
painoi pirtin oven kiinni.

       *       *       *       *       *

Oliko päivä jo painumassa? Eikö ollut aamupuoli vielä äsken?

Korpisilmänteen keskellä oli asumus yhä paikoillaan. Vielä aivan
äskettäin, aamupuolella, oli muuan mies istunut ja viivytellyt
silmänteen tuossa laidassa. Nyt sama mies istui tässä laidassa käytyään
halki tuon kodin ja konnun. Hän katseli vielä salaisesti asumukseen
päin, mutta aikoi pian siirtää istuinpaikkaansa tuonnemmaksi, johonkin
tiheämpään näreikköön, missä ei näkisi muuta kuin omien kasvojensa
kajastuksen.

Mies ei ollut tavannut vaimoaan — se seikka oli 'tavallaan pelastanut
hänelle tämän ehtoohetken. Ei hän osannut edes vaistota, oliko vaimo
pistäytynyt piiloon, vai oliko todella sattumalta poissa. Ei hän ollut
sitä kysynytkään; hän oli vain nopeasti kiirehtinyt pois, ettei sillä
vähällä enää olisi joutunutkaan vaimonsa kanssa kasvot vastakkain.

Tähän hän nyt oli päässyt. Kauemmaksi kyllä pitäisi siirtyä, etäälle,
tuonne päin, missä korpirastas jo viritteli kieltään. Mutta mieli
teki vielä viipyä tässäkin ja varkain puunrunkojen välitse silmätä
tuota entistä asumusta, jonka katon alla nyt asui vierasta väkeä.
Oli niinkuin olisi äsken keskipäivällä saattanut hautaan lähimmät
omaisensa: itkettävän kaihon ohessa hyväili mieltä myöskin vapautuksen
tunne. Maisema näytti silmään heikentyneeltä vanhalta muistolta:
kaistale peltoa ja navetan tausta, jonne lantaläjä oli jäänyt pois
viemättä. Asumuksesta kuului oven käynti, niinkuin äännähdys entisiltä
ajoilta.

Mies nousi ja lähti, käveli tietä kävelemistään katsellen paikkaa,
minne uudelleen istahtaisi. Väsytti kauheasti, jalat olivat iltaa
kohden taas hiukan turponeet. Sovelias istuinpaikka tarjoutui joka
askeleella, mutta ne olivat kaikki yhtäläisiä; teki mieli yhä vain
astua eteenpäin — niinkuin olisi istuinpaikan valitseminen nyt
merkinnyt jotain ratkaisevaa.

Kunnes ruumis melkein itsestään asettui istualleen tien oheen kiven
kylkeen, ja tosiaan tuntuikin nyt siltä, ettei hän tästä enää lähde?
— Ei jaksa eikä ole minne mennä. Hän koetteli käsin kaulaansa — ei
ajatellut mitään, mittaili vain molemmin käsin kaulansa ympärystä.
Kaikkein armaimmat kuvat kolmen, neljän vuoden takaa vakasivat mielen
kokonaan. Kun sulki silmänsä, ei tajunnut muuta olevankaan kuin nuo
kuvat. Katselen niitä vieläkin hetkisen, teen sitten mitä tehnenkin.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mies heräsi siihen, että hänen lähistöllään liikkui joku. Silmät
aukenivat ja totesivat yön olevan lähellä. Kuka liikkui? Oliko Hilma
tullut häntä etsimään? Kuinkas minä tähän tulinkaan?

Jo keksi silmä vanhan vaimon, joka varovasti kuhki kiven toisella
puolella. Äiti ja poika katselivat toisiaan niinkuin olisi poika
entisessä kotimökissä heräillyt. Kumpikaan ei ensin sanonut mitään.

— Koetin minä tässä olla hiljaa, kun aattelin, että uni sinulle nyt
parasta on, mutta heräsit kumminkin.

— Juu, minä nukahdin, kun rupesi niin väsyttämään. Kylläpä aika onkin
kulunut. Taitaa olla kello jo yhdeksän.

— Etkös kelloas ottanut — kyllä se siellä vielä on.

— En minä nähnyt enkä viitsinyt kysyä. Minä viivyin siellä niin vähän
aikaa.

— Kyllä on sentään ihmistä...

— No niin, no niin...

Se oli pojan tavallinen lausahdus ennen aikaan, kun hän tahtoi
keskeyttää äitinsä puheen. Äiti noudatti sitä aina ja niin nytkin.

Enempää sopimatta he lähtivät perätysten astumaan äidin mökille
päin. Sen verran äiti kumminkin matkalla sai sanotuksi, että hän oli
jostain kuullut pojan tulosta ja lähtenyt vastaan... ettei sen tiedä,
mitä tekee... Vasta siinä mennessä hän muisti, että hänellä hameensa
taskussa oli nisusen rippunenkin. Seh...

Oli yö, mutta se oli melkein kuin aamua unen jälkeen. Vaihtelevia
teitään äiti ja poika tulivat pienelle takamaan mökille, astuivat
sisälle hämyiseen huoneeseen, jossa tuoksahti uneliaan maatuneelta
— nyt niinkuin kymmenen vuotta sitten, niinä aikoina, jolloin poika
joskus poikkesi tänne nuorenmiehen retkiltään... Huomenna oli elämä
jatkuva.




AATTEEN MIES

Muistopiirteitä Janne Haavistosta.


1.

Tuhat pientä puroa luo yhtyneinä virran. Suomen punaisen kapinan
ja vapaussodan meidän kannaltamme katsoen suuriin virtoihin tihkui
suunnaton määrä liejuisiakin puroja eikä siitäkään uudesta virrasta,
joka niiden yhteenotosta syntyi, ole vieläkään senaikaiset liejut
tyyten pohjaan laskeneet, puhumattakaan niistä uusista, joita sittemmin
on siihen sekoitettu. Mutta että virta on jaksanut juosta eikä heti
hajonnut haihtuvaksi lietteeksi, siihen on tarvittu kirkkaita puroja
molempien alkuvirtojen syntyessä.

Se punainen puro, jonka lähimmin ja pisimmältä tunsin, kirvesmies
Janne Haavisto, hän oli tuota kirkasta lajia. Hänen elämänratansa
on historiallisesti erinomaisen tyypillinen ja ansaitsisi jo siitä
syystä laveammankin kuvauksen. Hänellä oli kyllä ikävystyttäviäkin
ominaisuuksia — jonkinlaista opettavaa pappamaisuutta ja luennoimaan
pyrkivää pitkäpiimäisyyttä. Nämä ominaisuudet olivat kumminkin vain
hänen hyvien ominaisuuksiensa kajastuksia, niinkuin kuvan värit
joskus tunkeutuvat paperin läpi nurjalle puolelle. Kaikkinensa hänen
luonteensa oli harvinaisen sopusointuinen ja ehyt eivätkä sitä saaneet
särkymään eivät isommat eivätkä pienemmät keinoilijat, jotka aikojen
kuluessa ovat työläisväkeä ulkoa ja sisältä päin tärvelleet ja
myrkyttäneet.

Siltä kannalta kuin tässä aion Haavisto-vainaan kuvaa piirtää —
yksilöllisenä ihmisenä ja työläistyyppinä — sopii parhaiten, että
järjestänsä esittelen ne eriaikaiset tekemiset, joihin itse hänen
kanssansa jouduin.

Ne alkoivat iltahämyssä syyskuun ensimmäisenä päivänä vuonna 1900
hänen silloisessa asunnossaan Mustanlahdenkadun 20:ssa. Hetki oli
minun omalle elämälleni varsin merkityksellinen. Olin edellisenä
päivänä isäni kanssa lähtenyt kotoa, pienestä salomaan mökistä, ja
puoli tuntia sitten minut oli julistettu Realilyseon oppilaaksi.
Äitini oli nuoruudestaan muistanut »sen Jannen, joka ennen oli
trenkinä Mäkelässä ja sitten nai sen Mäkipään Santran ja nyt oli
Tampereella timpermannina». Jannen ja Santran tykö minulle varattiin
siis kortteeri, mutta isävainaani oli hyvä psykoloogi: hän ei vienyt
minua tulevaan kortteeriini ennenkuin tutkintojännitys oli ohi.
Olimme edellisen yön Björkqvistin majatuvassa, leveällä puulaverilla,
kohmeloaan kuorsaavien maalaislahtarien välissä.

Tuntui siis sangen hienolta ja viehättävältä tulla oikeaan
kaupunkilaisasuntoon, jossa oli puleerattuja huonekaluja, fiikuksia,
piirongin päällä porsliinikoruja ja sängyt korkeiksi petatut ja
jossa ennen kaikkea vallitsi rauhallinen ja tasainen olo. Janne ei
ollut kotona meidän tullessamme, mutta saapui sitten pian, riisuutui
sukkasilleen ja siinä hiljakseen ja jatkuvasti omia iltamukavuuksiaan
järjestellen, sovitellen ensin tuolia ja sitten itseään tuolille,
sipaisten viiksiään ja korjaten jotakin vaatetuksessaan, koko ajan
pitäen kädessään Aamulehteä pääsemättä perästäkään oikein lukemisen
alkuun, hän jutteli meidän kanssamme.

Täydellinen ja mallikelpoinen pienoisporvarillinen henki vallitsi tässä
huushollissa, jonka sukunimi silloin oli Davidsson, tai oikeammin sen
kaikki väännökset, tavallisimmin Taavitsonni. Minä vasta oppineena
lyseolaisena vakiinnutin nimen oikeinkirjoituksen, minkä johdosta
liinavaatteissa kauan näkyi sekä T että D. Kun perhe oli lapseton,
saivat fiikukset ja porsliinikorut sitä paremmin olla rauhassa.
Kello yhdeksältä me menimme maata, Taavitsonni ja Täti, kuten vaimoa
puhuteltiin, yhteen sänkyyn, kaksi tehtaantyttöä toiseen ja minä
kolmanteen. Taavitsonni oli aina viimeisenä ylhäällä vetäen ensin
kellon ja sammuttaen sitten kattolampun. Aamulla olivat toiset töissään
ja Täti torilla kun minä heräsin. Aamiaislomallakaan en nähnyt muita
kuin Tädin, vasta iltasella perhe taas oli koolla. Kaikki päivät olivat
saman näköisiä. Toisella tehtaantytöllä oli varma sulhanen, toinen
käytti ahkerasti lainakirjastoa Tädin nilvimisistä huolimatta.

Minun täysihoidossani tuo Täti yritteliäänä entisenä talon tyttärenä
harjoitti melkoista saituutta ja kieroilua ja ilkeällä luonteellaan
usein kidutti minua rääpien ulkomuotoani ja solvaillen omaisiani
jollekin toiselle -sonskalle minun kuulteni, ja muuta semmoista.
Kenties hän ei ollut niin paha; hän saattoi kahden kesken joskus
jutella mukavastikin, mutta hänen henkinen pimeytensä oli ilmiömäinen.
Hän oli lyhytkasvuinen, kaitaluinen, ääneltään ja ololtaan tasainen,
hiukan hymyileväinen ja talollisen syntyperänsä puolesta hillityn
kopea. Puolisoiden välillä en koskaan kuullut mitään eripuraisuutta.
Minä nautin niin tavattomasti koulunkäynnistä ja kaupungissa olosta,
etten paljoa kärsinyt Tädin ilkeydestä, sitä vähemmin kun en koskaan
kokenut sellaista Taavitsonnin puolelta. Suopealla isällisyydellään
hän alusta aikain voitti minun kunnioitukseni niin perin pohjin, etten
koskaan myöhemminkään, kun jo olin perheellinen mies ja tunnettu
kirjailija, voinut kunnollisesti väittää häntä vastaan.

Perheen elämänarvoina ja harrastuksina olivat siihen aikaan siistit
mööpelit, siistit vaatteet, uudet kalossit ja pikkuhiljaa salavihkaa
karttuvat säästöt. Lauantaiehtoona Taavitsonni joi kyökissä pullon
olutta. Sitä tehdessään hän minusta näytti pelottavan vieraalta, koska
en siihen aikaan tiennyt sen kaameampaa paikkaa kuin anniskelut,
joista kostea naljainen löyhkä tunkeutui kadulle. Sunnuntait olivat
erinomaisen ehjiä ja tunnelmallisia päiviä, luultavasti juuri siitä
syystä, että Taavitsonni silloin oli koko päivän kotosalla ja hyvällä
tuulella. Sekä aamu- että päiväkirkossa käytiin. Taavitsonni tunsi ja
taisi erinomaisen hyvin kaikki kirkolliset menot, hänellä oli hyvä
nuottikorva ja pehmeä taipuisa ääni. Kirkonmenon huippukohta oli komea
Hilariuksen kiitosvirsi »Me kiitämme sinua». Juhlaväreet tuntuivat
ihossani, kun seurakunta nousi sitä veisaamaan ja Taavitsonnin ääni
siitä viereltäni kuului ylinnä Aleksanterin kirkon Mustanlahden
puoleisella lehterillä. En voi tätä kirjoittaessani olla sitä
hyräilemättä ja kun tulen korkokohtaan »Jeesus Kristus Pyhän Hengen
kanssa», olen kuulevinani Haavisto-vainaan hienon tenorin. Vielä 1916
hänen silloisessa mökissään täällä Hämeenkyrössä innostuimme entisiä
aikoja muistellessamme niin paljon, että keskellä arkista syysiltaa
lauloimme tuon juhlallisen hymnin alusta loppuun. Tuo silloin harras
sosialisti puheli, ettei ole tullut käytyä kirkossa kuulemassa, osaako
täkäläinen lukkari sitä kunnollisesti soittaa. Haavisto saattoi niin
puhua, sillä hän oli laulanut sen lukemattomia kertoja Ilmari Krohnin
säestyksellä.

Tämä erinomaisen säännöllinen ja erinomaisen viehättävä elämä jatkui
minun nähteni kolmatta vuotta. Minä menestyin hyvin koulussa, josta
kiiteltiin hyvää kortteeria, ja Taavitsonnin perheen hyvinvointi
vaurastui ilmeisesti. Kortteerilaiset olivat kaiketi tuottavia, koska
Täti kokosi niitä yhä enemmän. Siellä oli lopulta paitsi minua ja noita
kahta tehtaalaista vielä muuan maalta tuttu teollisuuskoululainen ja
sitten hänen sisarensa, joka oli saamassa lääkärinhoitoa johonkin
ilkeään mätätautiinsa. Siihen aikaan Täti kiusasi minua sillä, että tuo
tyttö muka oli minun morsiameni, jonka typerän kiusan vaikutuksesta
minä vimmoissani taas säälimättömästi irvistelin tyttöä hänen tautinsa
tähden. Täti ei tästä ollut millänsäkään, vaan saattoi ilkeästi
hymyillen taas kääntyä minua jollakin muulla tavoin kiusaamaan. Olin
kovin iloinen, milloin hän istui raamattu-urakkansa vieressä. Perheessä
oli näet komea kuvaraamattu, jonka lukemiseen Täti oli jo ennen minun
tuloani ryhtynyt ja lienee nyt ollut jossain Kuningasten kirjassa. Hän
luki ääneen, mutta kuitenkin vain itselleen, sillä luvussa ei ollut
minkäänlaista tolkun alkuakaan, mutta hän antoi sen kumminkin edetä
tasaisena jonotuksena, joka etäämmältä kuului kohtalaisen sujuvalta.
Mutta lukunsa aikana ja sen jälkeen hän oli ikäänkuin hiukan parempi
ihminen.

Minun siellä asuessani Täti sitten alkoi sairastella, ja vihdoin
pitkän ja vaikean keuhko- ja munuaistaudin murtamana, oltuaan pari
vuorokautta tiedottomana, lakkasi hengittämästä. Koko ajan minä asuin,
tein koulutyöni ja nukuin samassa huoneessa, niin myös tehtaalaiset.
Taavitsonni oli jäänyt leskeksi ja samalla oli varsinaisesti päättynyt
tuo pienoisporvarillinen kausi hänen elämässään. Noin neljänkymmenen
viiden vuotiaana hän vasta astui elämänsä varsinaiseen taistelukauteen.
Arvattavasti oli kyliä jonkinlainen taistelu sisältynyt tuon
pienoisporvarillisen tason saavuttamiseenkin: jotakin sen tapaista
kuin Uutelan Juhalla Lumikankaan aikoina Linnankosken »Pakolaisissa».
Ero oli vaan siinä, että tämä Juha sai talon-tyttärensä. Mutta joka
tapauksessa oli taistelu maalaisesta huutopojasta pikkuvarakkaaksi
kaupunginasukkaaksi, joka pyhäsin ulos mennessään nautiskeli hienosta
turkistaan ja krimminnahkalakistaan, ollut vähäpätöisempää ja ikäänkuin
puoliuneliasta siihen nähden mitä sitten seurasi.


2.

Haavisto ei tullut toimeen leskenä. Hän yritti sitä pari vuotta,
jona aikana hänen oivalliset liinavaate- ja astiavarastonsa kärsivät
pahaa hallaa erinimisten huushollinpitäjien käsissä. Hän oli kaikilla
vaistoillaan kiintynyt siihen inhimillisen elämän muotoon, jota
sanotaan kodiksi. Minun vanhempieni välityksellä hän tutustui orpanaani
Mäkelän Hultaan ja meni sitten piakkoin naimisiin hänen kanssaan. On
vaikea kuvitella kahta erilaisempaa vaimoihmistä kuin Haavisto-vainaan
molemmat vaimot. Hulta oli miestään lähes parikymmentä vuotta nuorempi,
intomielinen »aatteiden» kannattaja, joka ei mitään niin vihannut kuin
— kaikkia niitä näkökohtia, jotka tuossa perheessä olivat aikaisemmin
vallinneet. Hultan elämänkatsomuksen pohjana on aina ollut se,
että ihmiselämän arvo on mitattava sen henkisen rikkauden mukaan.
Entisaikoina oli tuo pienoisporvarillinen, kademielinen, juonia punova,
pikkurikastumisillaan koppaileva ja mullimaisuuteen asti aatteeton
kääpiöporvarillisuus, joka kaikista punaisuuksista huolimatta tänä
päivänä on niin vallitseva varsinkin maalaispieneläjien keskuudessa —
tuo kaikki oli nuorelle Hultalle niin vierasta, ettei hän sitä edes
halveksinut. Omasta puolestaan hän on melkoisen naivi sielu ja herahtaa
helposti kyyneliin aatteen puolesta vohkaistessaan. Niihin aikoihin
kun hän tuli Haaviston vaimoksi, oli hän jo ehtinyt tulisesti syttyä
raittiuden, isänmaallisuuden ja naisasian aatteisiin.

Tähän nuoreen olentoon Haavisto nyt kiintyi rehellisen ja puhtaan
luonteensa koko voimalla ja ikämiehen vakaalla tunteella. Hulta aloitti
heti aatteellisen korpivaelluksensa. Pintamuokkaus toimitettiin
uskonnollisuuden aseilla: kenties Hulta vaistosi, että alkuvaikeudet
tätä tietä olivat pienemmät. Haavisto oli jo aikaisemmin joskus käynyt
N.M.K.Y:ssä, noin vaan sunnuntai-illan leppoisuutta tehostamassa.
Hulta liittyi nyt N.N.K.Y:een ja perheen uskonnollinen elämä sai hänen
totensa eloisan palavuuden. Molemmat kävivät yhdistyksissään, Haavisto
tasaisena ja asiallisena, Hulta intomielisenä, valmistaen hartaasti sen
rukouksen sanamuodon, jonka hänen vuorollaan piti esittää jonkinlaisen
alajaoston yhteisessä rukoushetkessä. Kun oli puhe jostakin
toimihenkilöstä ja minä kysyin, että sinäkö siihen nyt valitaan, niin
vastasi Hulta suutaan suipentaen, niinkuin lapset esittäessään jonkin
rajoittavan pykälän leikkisäännöissään: »Ei siihen voi päästä muut
kuin ne, jotka ovat elämänyhteydessä Jumalan kanssa». Tämäntapaiset
kokemukset kelpasivat sitten Hultalle mainioiksi puolusteluiksi, kun
marraskuun tuuli 1905 oli puhaltanut sammuksiin hänen uskonnolliset
harrastuksensa.

Suurlakosta alkaen Haavisto liittyi työväenliikkeeseen ja pysyi
sen riveissä kuolemaansa asti. Tampereella asuessaan hän toimi
kirvesmiesten ammattiosastossa ja ulkotyöväen yhdistyksessä ollen
kummassakin järjestössä puheenjohtajana, joita arvokkaita saavutuksia
hän kyllä muisti minulle ja muille vähäpätöisemmille henkilöille
silloin tällöin mainita, sillä hänellä oli erityisissä tapauksissa
taipumusta viattomaan isotteluun; se istui hänessä sieltä mööpelien
ja hyvien vaatteitten aikakaudelta. Muuten kuvasivat nämä hänen
johtoasemansa hyvästi sekä oloja että Haaviston omaa persoonallisuutta.
Mies, joka neljänkymmenenviiden vuoden ikään on »katsellut» vain
Aamulehteä ja Suonien Lähetyssanomia ja kirjailijoista tunsi lähemmin
vain Lutheruksen; jonka kirjoitustaito alussa oli kyseenalainen eikä
koskaan kohonnut alempaa välttävää korkeammalle; jonka numerotaito
rajoittui auttavaan päässälaskuun; näillä edellytyksillä saattoi
mies olla yhtaikaa kahden huomattavan järjestön etumies maan
suurimmassa työläiskaupungissa. Ilmeisesti ei noilla järjestöillä
ollut sen parempaa miestä. Sillä joskin Haavistolta paljon puuttui
tiedoissa ja taidoissa, niin oli hänellä sen sijaan jotain muuta,
jota on vaikea sanoilla määritellä, oli tuota luonteen synnynnäistä
puhtautta ja vaatimatonta ylevyyttä, jonka edessä löyhäsuinen nuori
huligaani tunsi nolostuvansa. Hänen toveruutensa ja uskollisuutensa
olivat horjumattomat. Hän saattoi suuttua, mutta ei vihata. En
milloinkaan havainnut hänessä oirettakaan minkäänlaiseen juonitteluun
enkä kenkkuiluun — tätä iskevää uudissanaa hän ei liene oppinut
edes käyttämään. Hän ei koskaan yksityisessä eikä julkisessa
puolue-esiintymisessään alentunut poliittiseksi räämäsuuksi. Hän piti
sellaista porvaiia, jolla ei ollut takanaan muuta kuin omaisuutta,
jonkinlaisena koomillisena ilmiönä yhteiskunnassa. Varsinaisia herroja,
niitä jotka olivat saaneet oppia ja »kehitystä», hän sensijaan piti
arvossa ja kunniassa. »Kyllä oikeitten herrojen kanssa aina kelpaa» —
hänellä oli tapana sanoa — »ne ymmärtävät puheen ja niitten puhetta
ymmärtää, mutta sivistymättömien pikkupösöjen ja typerien vertaistensa
kanssa on pääsemättömissä.»

Haaviston perusaatteena työväenliikettä ajaessaan oli muuan
historiallinen harhaluulo. Kun herkkänä nuorukaisena vuosikausia
hyvin läheisesti seurustelin Haaviston kanssa, luulen osittain sitä
tietä saaneeni tuon harhaluulon, joka mitä kiusoittavimmin on minussa
istunut. Tämä harhaluulo on se, että työväki, köyhälistö, sinänsä,
yhteiskunnallisena luokkana muka on jollakin tavoin parempaa ja
jalompaa ihmisainesta kuin mammonan sokaisema porvaristo. Järki ja
historia osoittavat kiusallisen selvästi, että tuo luulo on päin
seiniä. Mutta se luulo on tavattoman viettelevä, ja kuten sanottu,
pysyi Haavisto-vainaa siinä uskossaan vuorenvarmana viimeiseen
henkäykseensä asti. Sellaista ihmettä kuin suurta eurooppalaista sotaa
hän ei ollenkaan pitänyt mahdollisena: eiväthän suuret ja kehittyneet
länsimaiset työväenjoukot voineet sellaista sallia ja niistähän se
viime kädessä riippui. Niin, eipä olisi luullut Kautskyn ja Jaurés'in
oppilaiden taipuvan viidettävuotiseen toistensa teurastamiseen.
Mutta kaikkien teoriojen vika on se, että ne ovat harmaita. Omassa
puoluetoiminnassaan Haavisto kohtasi lukuisia lurjuksia sekä pomoina
että rivimiehinä, mutta hänen uskonsa työväenluokan inhimilliseen
paremmuuteen ei vaan lannistunut. Oli vain saatava olot paranemaan,
että nuo hyvät edellytykset pääsisivät kehittymään, ja sen vuoksi
oli niiden, jotka jotain käsittivät, tehtävä kaikki voitavansa
työväenluokan kohottamiseksi. Ja Haavisto teki. Siinä pienessä
maalaisesikunnassa, jossa hän sodan aikana toimi, hän istui yötä päivää
koettaen pitää yllä jonkinlaista järjestystä ja arvokkuutta. Tuntuu
ensi katsannolta hiukan tragi-koomilliselta niissä oloissa ajatella
tuon rasittuneen ikämiehen ponnistuksia. En tiedä mitä tuloksia niistä
oli, mutta hänen esikuntansa piirissä eivät punaiset tehneet tihutöitä.

Tampereen ajoilta muistan erityisesti eräät arpajaiset, jotka
kirvesmiesten ammattiosasto pani toimeen. Haavistolla ja Hultalla
taisi siinä hommassa olla vähin kaikki virat. He juoksivat ja
istuivat yötä päivää, kuljettivat käsirattailla tavaroita, ettei
olisi tullut tarpeettomia menoja. Kun heidän molempienkin kirjanpito-
ja kirjoitustaitonsa oli heikonlainen, olivat toimet heille sitä
vaikeampia. Minua pyydettiin sitten selvittelemään niitä arpajaistilejä
ja siinä oli minullakin vielä urakkaa moneksi päiväksi. Suurin vaivoin
saatiin lopulta tilit siihen kuntoon, että kelpasivat ammattiosaston
rahastonhoitajalle Rasille eli Kauppiselle. Kenties ne olisivat hänelle
kelvanneet, vaikka niissä olisi ollut laskuvirheitäkin ja vaikka
Haavisto olisi käyttänyt ajuria käsirattaitten asemesta, sillä katso,
kun Rasi eli Kauppinen oli ne rahat saanut, pisti hän ne lompakkoonsa,
jossa jo ennakolta oli Amerikan passi ja jätti Haaviston ja muut
timpermannit muistelemaan, kuinka niitä arpajaisia oikein hommattiin
ja tilejä hierottiin. Hulta itki ja tuskitteli, mutta Haavisto taputti
häntä olalle ja lohdutti sillä, että sellaisia pikku kompastuksia aina
sattuu sillä tiellä, joka vie eteenpäin; että sellaiset raukat ovat
vallitsevien olojen kasvatteja ja uhreja, joita on pikemmin säälittävä
kuin tuomittava.

Ja niinpä tapaammekin pian sen jälkeen Haaviston vielä
pitempiaikaisessa ja raskaammassa raadannassa ulkotyöväen yhdistyksen
puheenjohtajana. Yhdistys oli rakennuttanut talonsa, käynyt pyytämässä
ja saanutkin suuria herroja takuuseen ja ponnisteli nyt velkojensa
kanssa. Että yritys lopulta meni nurin, ei ollut mikään suuri
ihme, mutta se viimeiseen asti kestänyt alttius, jota yhdistyksen
ukot Haavisto etunenässä osoittivat, on muistelemisen arvoista.
He järjestivät talolleen elävät kuvatkin ja istuivat myöhään
yöhön palkattomasti, toiset pilettejä myymässä, toiset ovimiehinä
heiluttuaan päivät kirvesvarressa. Kun korot lankesivat ja kassa
oli tyhjä, otettiin laina ja menivät ukot itse takaukseen. Vielä
täältä Hämeenkyröstä Haavisto vähentyneistä varoistaan makseli niitä
takauksia. Kun yhdistyksen raha-asiat näin menivät hunningolle, saivat
suuret herratkin maksaa takuunsa. Mutta Haavisto kiitteli aina sitä
sivistynyttä ja arvokasta tapaa, jolla herrat suhtautuivat tuohon
tulemaan.


3.

Uuvutettuaan itsensä ja heikennettyään työvoimansa Haavisto vihdoin
osti täältä mökin ja muutti siihen 1914. Tässä hänen elämänsä vaiheessa
jouduin vielä hänen kanssaan hyvin herttaiseen ja läheiseen tekemiseen,
jota erinomaisen mielelläni muistelen. Asian laita oli se, että tuona
samana suvena tuli morsiamekseni muuan sen talon palvelustyttö, jonka
maalla ja läheisyydessä Haaviston mökki oli. Kun saatoimme tavata
toisiamme vain myöhään illalla töiden päätyttyä, ja kun aina olen
pitänyt huligaanimaisuutena öisin luimistella nurkissa ja tunkeutua
taloon isännän tietämättä, niin vietimme yhdessäoloa tavallisesti
maantiellä kävellen ja metsässä istuskellen usein aamupuoleen. Kun
Haaviston mökki oli siinä lähellä, menin säännöllisesti heille
lopuksi yötä nukkumaan. Olin siihen aikaan ilmeinen tyhjäntoimittaja
lopetettuani äskettäin yliopistolukuni pahoin velkaantuneena ja
tutkintoja suorittamatta. Seurusteluni seitsentoistavuotiaan
piikatytön kanssa oli siis omiansa herättämään siveellisiä arveluita
naapuristossa, varsinkin uskonnollisissa, ja lienevät nämä vihjailleet
Haavistoa parittajaksi, koska luulivat meidän siellä yhdessä öitä
makailleen. Se nyt oli sitä lajia. Mutta se tapa, millä Haavisto
suhtautui noihin minun yöllisiin retkiini, oli hänelle erinomaisen
kuvaavaa. Hän oli suopean ystävällinen, mutta niinkuin ei mitään olisi
tapahtunut; hän ei kajonnut arkaan asiaan. Se minkä hän jätti sanomatta
tuntui vaan ikäänkuin ilmassa. Jos olisin menetellyt arvottomasti,
ei minun olisi ollut sen jälkeen varsin mukava lähestyä Haavistoa.
Niinkuin kaikkein vähäpätöisimmästä asiasta siitä keskusteltiin
silloinkin kun minä pyysin häntä meidän puolestamme käymään pappilassa
ottamassa kuulutuksen. Toimi sopi erittäin hyvin tuolle vanhalle
kirkkomiehelle.

Työväenliikkeestä ei Haavisto tietenkään täälläkään voinut erota. Hän
liittyi paikalliseen yhdistykseen ja joutui ennen pitkää etualalle,
luottamustoimiin. Sitä kesti miten kuten parisen vuotta, kunnes
alkoi yhä selvemmin nousta pinnalle se rutto, joka vuotamalla vuoti
vallityömailta ja yleensä idästä päin ja jota vastaan ei Suomen
työväkeä ollut tullut tarpeeksi rokotettua. Olo tuli Haavistolle yhä
sietämättömämmäksi ja lopulta mahdottomaksi, jolloin hän vähin äänin
vetäytyi erilleen yhdistyksestä.

Mutta kun sitten kuume nousi täydellisesti hourinta-asteelle, ei
hän enää _voinut_ pysyä erillään. Hän piti sattunutta tapausta
onnettomuutena, päättyipä se kuinka tahansa, mutta oli omasta
puolestaan sitä mieltä, ettei hänen sopinut jättää luokkatovereitaan
onnettomuuden hetkellä. Niinpä hän siis meni uudestaan Mahnalaan
ja toimi — toimi Lappeenrantaan asti. Heikkona ja sairaana hänen
vielä onnistui salata se haava, jonka oli saanut erään nuorukaisen
browningista, jonka tämä oli salannut vangiksi joutuessaan.

Olisin antanut paljon, jos olisin päässyt näkemään Haaviston ajatukset
ja mielenliikunnot hänen elämänsä viimeisinä viikkoina. Kerrotaan
hänen kuolleen uskossa parempaan tulevaisuuteen, vaikka hän sai nähdä
semmoiset määrät inhimillisiä raakuutta ja raadollisuutta, joka hänen
omalle luonteelleen oli niin tuiki vierasta.

Mainiossa teoksessaan »Väkivaltaa ja vääryyttä» (joka teos muuten
jokaisen kansalaisen rantajätkästä arkkipiispaan asti pitäisi osata
ulkoa) lausuu Carl G. Laurin: »Vapaus tai kuolema» — se huuto herättää
luonnon välttämättömyydellä aina vastahuudon: »Järjestys tai kuolema».
Niin on vuodesta 1789 jatkunut tuo surullinen kiertokulku, kehityksen
kuviona on ollut _circulus vitiosus_ (turmiollinen ympyrä). Tarvitaan
kelpo annos kansalaishyvettä, jotta tunnuslause »Järjestys ja vapaus»
tulisi täydeksi totuudeksi jossakin valtiossa.

Janne Haavisto oli yksi vähäisimmistä, mutta hänessä oli erinomaisen
vahva luontainen vaisto siitä, että järjestys ja vapaus ovat ne
kaksoissisaret, jotka yhdessä — _mutta vain yhdessä_ — voivat loihtia
inhimillisen elämän maapallon päällä, tuon muutamia vuosimiljoonia
kestävän hetkisen ei tosin taisteluttomaksi lekotteluksi mutta
kumminkin siedettäväksi. Enkä sittenkään, minä enempi kuin
Haavistokaan, pääse siitä uskosta, että työväellä, jonka tietoa,
tahtoa ja tunnetta eivät sokaise osingot ja keinottelut, on suuremmat
edellytykset kuin muilla luokilla ratkaisevasti vaikuttaa niiden
toteuttamiseksi.




VAIHEESSA


Tämä maailma on jo unohtanut Jussi Kovasen eli Kivasen. Moni kyllä
tietää, että hän makaa sairaana Plihtarin pakarikamarissa ja että
hän tuskin enää paranee siitä taudista; se on sällin taudiksi liian
pitkällistä parantuakseen. Mutta ketään se ei liikuta, ei niin
vähääkään. Sekä Kivennavan että Rovaniemen raitilla voi tällä hetkellä
kävellä sällismies, joka kyseen tullessa tuntee Kivasen Jussin, vaikkei
omasta alotteestaan tule häntä ajatelleeksi. Jussi puolestaan tuossa
tuskallisena viruessaan muistaa hempeinä häivähdyksinä suhteitaan
kaikenlaisiin ihmisiin...

Hän on kuudenkolmatta ikäinen ja hän tietää olevansa mennyttä tältä
elämältä, vieläpä varsin pian. Ajattelipa ja kuvitteli muuten mitä
tahansa, se tosiasia ympäröi mielen ajattelemattakin, uutena ennen
kokemattomana asianhaarana, joka vaatii hempeätä alistumista, ei
tyydy vanhoihin koeteltuihin metkuihin. On jo etäällä hänen viimeinen
sellainen yrityksensäkin. Poikkesi näet tässä keväämmällä muuan
vanha kaveri katsomassa ja antoi kelpo ryypyt takataskustaan. Jussi
oli silloin viimeisillä voimillaan viimeisen kerran entisen olonsa
lumoissa, taisipa viimeisen kerran silloin kunnollisesti kirota ja
vannoa, uhkasi nousta sängystään, nousikin ja toikkaroi rappusille.
Siinä tunnin läähätettyään pääsi vielä omin voimin takaisin, mutta
sänkyyn päästyään luuli jo loppunsa tulevan. Silloin jäi elämä sinne
rappusille ja pihamaan polulle, jota tuttava oli mennyt. Kyynellyttävä
kaiho jäi ahtaaseen rintaan.

Kyyneleet alkoivatkin siitä ruveten tulla erinomaisen helposti;
koko eletyn elämän riuskeus pyrki väkisinkin sulamaan niihin ja
näyttäytymään tajunnalle vain haikeana nöyryytysten jaksona.
Joskus, joskus vielä sisu hiukan elpyi, kun talon emäntä, tunnettu
uskovainen, Jussin kyyneleet uumottuaan alkoi jaaritella hänelle
sielun valmistuksesta ja samassa hengen vedossa esitellä vaivastalolle
muuttoa. Jussi taisteli kyyneleitä vastaan, mutta sai kumminkin
sanotuksi, ettei hänen sentään vielä tarvitse mennä vaivastalolle; hän
voi maksaa hyyrynsä ja ruokansa selvällä rahalla, jos emäntä tahtoo, ja
muuttaa sitten jonnekin muualle. Kyllä niitä on, jotka hänet ottavat.
Vähältä piti, ettei hän vielä perään sanonut jumalauta. Kun saisi
jotenkin sanan kulkemaan Hakalan Pauliinalle, että kävisi täällä.

Emäntä kiiruhti myöntämään, että saahan tässäkin olla, kun ei näyttänyt
maallista elämää enää pitkältä riittävän. Pauliina kumminkin saisi
tulla. Ja Pauliina tuli, palatessaan hieromasta sieltä ja mennessään
kuppaamaan sinne, kertoi, kuinka hänen mökillään oli viime pyhäyönä
Suojan Saimasta tapeltu: Iivari sinne oli tullut hulluna juovuksissa,
kun Saima oli siellä Oskarin kanssa yön kulmaa. — Oli, oli Elmakin
käynyt.

Jussi oli poikkeillut Kuppari-Pauliinan mökillä niinkuin paikkakunnan
muukin irrallinen väki. Hän oli jossakin vaiheessaan makaillutkin
siellä pari päivää, ostanut nisusta ja limunaatia ja itsetietoisesti
nautiskellut vapaudestaan. Siltäiseltä oli siellä vieläkin hänen
nahkareppunsa ja puolipitoiset kenkänsä — ne olivat siellä ja Pauliina
oli nyttemmin hänelle niinkuin äiti. Se oli käynyt täällä monta
kertaa, tuonut milloin mitäkin ja nyt lopuksi luvannut toimittaa
pastorin täällä käymään. Kuumeinen ajatus tuijotti tuohon ihmeelliseen
seikkaan — oli kuin olisi jokin uusi hätä nyt tänä päivänä yhä
kiihtyen ympäröinyt Jussin. Jokin käsittämätön yleinen epäselvyys,
jonka kun olisi saanut järjestykseen, olisi varmaan rinnan ahdistuskin
hellittänyt Oli pakko sellainen, kuin olisi pitänyt jollakin uudella
tavalla muistaa kaikki elämänsä tapaukset ja ihan tuossa tuokiossa.
Ei se ollut mitään sellaista tavallista synnintuntoa, jota vanhukset
kuolinvuoteillaan tolkuttomien houreittensa välissä kuiskivat ja
lihavat emäntätylleröt täysissä voimissaankin paasaavat. Se oli vaan
semmoista, että — kuinka hän tuon Pauliinankin kanssa noin ihan
tahtomattaan oli joutunut tämmöisiin väleihin. Ei Pauliina ollut
jumalinen, kaukana siitä. Hänellä oli kolme yksinäistä lasta, hän
hieroi ja kuppasi ja hänen mökillään pidettiin monenlaista humua. Mutta
hän poikkesi tänne äskettäin, antoi taskustaan Jussille piparkakkua,
näki katsomatta Jussin onnettoman tilan ja puheli leppoisasti
supattaen, että ehkä sinun sentään tulisi parempi ollaksesi, jos
pastori täällä kävisi, ei se ole mikään turhamainen mies... Ja niin
monta kertaa kuin Jussi oli lopettanut emännän samanlaiset puheet.
Mutta Pauliinan puhe oli niinkuin yhteistä harkintaa yhteisessä
ahdingossa ja — tänä päivänä pastori tulee tänne. Se on yhtä auttamaton
asia kuin sekin, että sisuksissa tuntuu kauhea pakotus, jalat ovat
ajettuneet ja pää kuuma ja että hän tuli tehneeksi sen kirkosta
eroomisen tempunkin, niin kuin niin monta muuta vaaratonta rohkeuden
näytettä ulkona kujilla. Ne sopivat niin hyvin siihen ilmaan, joka
leviää tuolla maailman teillä ja tanhuvilla, ja jossa elämä on jotakin
vallan toista kuin tämä tämmöinen hempeys. — Sinä Jussi sairastat nyt
ja kuolet pian.

Tuskallinen olo pusertuu taas kyyneleeksi. Kukas minä olen ja mitä
minä olen tehnyt? Olen elänyt ihan niinkuin — niinkuin vahingossa,
niinkuin eilen, hyvin pitkän eilisen, ja siitä nyt on hätä, ettei
ole tullut oikein täyttä eloa elettyä. Niinhän tämä on niinkuin
olisin vielä mukula, äidin poika, Miinan, joka oli kivulloinen ja
kuoli vaivastalolla. Jos minua nyt lähdettäisiin sinne viemään,
niin en voisi sille mitään. Minä en pääse enää vapaille maanteille
ja etäisiin kyliin, joihin toivo niin kerkeästi sijoitti keveitä ja
nopeita rahanansioita, ihanine jälkiremuineen, noita sällielämän
suuria suloja. Äiti — mitäs se sällille kuuluu? Sitä ei kysy pomo eikä
heila. Mutta tässä äiti tulee mieleen ja kaikki, kaikki... Kaikki
sellainen iankaikkisen turhanaikainen, jonka ei pitäisi elämiseen ja
olemiseen kuulua eikä kuulukaan noiden, jotka tuolla etääntyvässä
ulkomaailmassa elävät ilman minua... Nyt oli niinkuin huoneen nurkat
olisivat väistyneet kauemmaksi ja sieltä nousivat ja lähestyivät nuo
pirulliset seikat niinkuin kummitukset tai niinkuin jotkut tohelot
puolitutut lapset. Siinäpä se, että ne olivat hiukan tuttuja, hän ei
houraillut. Ellei sittenkin ollut hourailua tämä asioitten nurinkurinen
kääntyminen: ettei enää tuntunut tekevän mielikään terveeseen elämään
ja että nuo tämän hetken kummitukset, joiden muistista nutistaminen
ennen oli ollut paras voimien tunnu, nyt kävivät rohkean tutuiksi.
Äidistä se alkoi ja pikkupoikuudesta.

Kovanenhan minä olen ja Kivaseksi sanotaan. Niillä lukusijoilla, joilla
minä sen nimen otin, minä ensi kerran hengessäni kirosin pappia,
joka irvisteli, että siinähän sitä on nimeä hyvällekin. Kun sitten
illemmalla sain Pauliinan mökillä sahtia, joka ei oikeastaan muuta
ollut kuin kaljaa, niin minä sakissa jankkasin papin sanaa ja hoin,
että minä olen vaikka Kivanen, jumalauta — ja siitä alkaen olinkin.
Miinan Jussi, Kovanen, Kivanen — niinkuin tuossa sarjassa sittenkin
näkyisi jotain tylyä hymyä ihmisten puolelta, niittenkin, joita on
aina pitänyt miehinä ja esikuvinaan. Ja eiväthän ne voikaan muuta kuin
ilvehtiä tälle tilalle, jossa minä nyt olen. Ja eiväthän ne yleensäkään
voi muuta kuin ilvehtiä tai — panna tosi huminaksi. Mikä piru siinä on,
etten minä sittenkään ole oikein jäntterä mies, en ole koskaan saanut
oikeata tilaisuutta ollaksenikaan, että on aina tympäissyt, milloin
olen ollut jonkun onnettoman voittavinani. Ja tämä nyt, tämä tuska,
sehän se on kaikkein onnettomin ja hervottomin ja se minut voittaa...

Tule, tule ukkosilma kakaramaisuuksinesi; voin minä tässä vielä katsoa
sinua päin ennenkuin pappi tulee. Olenhan minä sentään kirkosta
eronnut, vaikka sinä nyt väität, että se on pieni asia. Mutta se on
papille suuri asia ja siinäpä kohden juuri minä ainakin vielä olen
papista voitolla; se luulee, että minulla on jokin hätä sen tähden.
Siinä pappi erehtyy; se juttu vaivaa minua vain kakaramaisuudellaan:
että minä ja se rytkysuutari olemme ainoat koko pitäjässä, kun koko
Kuuskosken humusakki ei ollut semmoisista eroomisista tietävinään.

Mutta — jospa minä panenkin papin piukalle ja näytän sille tämän kaiken
muun, näytän uhalla ja häikäilemättä tämän, tämän... väännättävän
tuskan. Aivan outo ja kummallinen tunne levisi Jussin kuumaan tajuun
ja kun sen valtaan antautui, tuntui siltä kuin voimat olisivat
lisääntyneet. Hän oli näkevinään kauniskasvoisen nuoren papin niinkuin
lamaan lyötynä, kun hän paljastaa sille kaiken tämän, minkä rinnalla
sellainen kirkosta eroominen on vähäpätöinen nulikkatemppu. Ennen
tuntematon aavistus suuren miehisen voiton mahdollisuudesta täytti
kuolevan sällin mielen. Hän ei voittaisi oikeata suurta sälliä, mutta
pastorin hän voittaa, jota taas ei suursälli voitaisikaan, ei voisi
ollenkaan mitään koetusta tullakaan esimerkiksi pastorin ja Huru-Kallen
välillä... Mutta hän, Jussi, tietää nyt asian. Pastori on hempeä,
siloihoinen herrasmies, sitä tulee melkein sääli...

Mieli kiihtyi, mutta kiihtymys oli nyt toista lajia, se toi voimaa.
Niinkuin olisi kaikkialta mahtavasti virrannut tajuntaan niitä
voitonmuistoja, joita äsken tuskan kiihtyessä oli niin toivottomana
kaivannut. Ukkosilma ja sitten vielä se toinen olivat parhaita. Ne
olivat äsken nousseet nurkista kummituksina, puolituttuina kakaroina,
nyt ne olivat hävinneet, mutta niiden voima oli miehen sisuksissa.
Hänpä Jussi Kovanen oli ne elänyt ja kokenut, ei tarvinnut muuta kuin
ne voittaa, näin ne nähdä, ja kuolema sai tulla, ja ensin pastori...

       *       *       *       *       *

Se oli ollut koko iltapuoli silloin siellä Pekkas-Villellä niinkuin
tämän valmistusta. Jussi oli juuri uittojen loputtua majaillut
Pauliinan mökillä ja vain niinkuin piloillaan suostunut Villelle työn
apuun yhdeksi päiväksi. Hän oli silloin välmännyt suutaan niin että
jo itseäkin väsytti — eihän siellä ollut mitään vastaajaa, tuskin
kunnon naurajaakaan, rivot puheet ja uhittelut lensivät löyhinä ilmaan.
Iltapuolella meni pilveen ja ehtoollista syötäessä oli jo jylhää
pirtissäkin. Jussi jatkoi syödessäänkin välmäystään — hän muisti vielä
nytkin, mitä hän oli puhunut kasvisvoista ja sanonut lopuksi, että
tämän pojan hottiin ei mene sitä lajia yhtä murenoakaan, ennen hän
syö vaikka... ja niin edespäin, kunnes aterian lopulla Villen akka
sanoi kuivakkaasti, että nyt häntä sitten söit kerrakseen, näkyipä
tuo maittaneen. Eihän siinä muuta voinut kuin väittää vastaan, ja
lähteä nopeahkoon kortteeria kohden. Ensimäiset salamat välkähtivät
Jussin lähtiessä, häntä kehoitettiin jäämään, mutta hän lasketti oven
aukeamassa kaikkein rivoimman uhittelun akkojen salama-siunauksista ja
painui salskeana hakatielle.

Eikä siellä hakatiellä sen kummempaa tapahtunut, kuin että tämä Jussi
erään ankaran ja kovin läheisen jyrähdyksen hetkellä kohotti oikean
kätensä kaksi etusormea taivasta kohden ja tiesi vannoneensa valan,
joka ei sisältänyt sanoja mutta sitä kauheamman ajatuksen. Ei tosin
ajatuskaan ollut selvä, mutta kauhea se oli — niinkauan kuin rajuilmaa
kesti. Kun ilma sitten päivänlaskun aikaan kirkastui, oli Jussin olo
mitä suloisin. Hän leperteli sydämellisesti Pauliinan kanssa ja lähti
vielä yhdeksän aikaan maantielle, vaikka hyvin tiesi, ettei raiteilla
tänä iltana mitään ollut. Tuo ihmeellinen sormennosto jäi kauaksi
niinkuin ehtoolla sattunut tapaus aamulla on jäänyt unen taakse. Sinä
yönä ei Pauliinan mökillä käynyt muita vieraita ja Jussista tuntui unta
odottaessaan ihmeen kotoiselta ja turvalliselta.

Koko asia meni menojaan; seuraava talvi oli Jussille hauskimpia aikoja.
Mutta sitten tuli kevät. Jussi meni uitoille ensi päässä, kun öisin
vielä oli kuuraa. Hän sairastui kuumeeseen; ei auttanut mikään, täytyi
jäädä taloon makaamaan. Jäseniäkin kolotti ja ne turpoivat hiukan...
Ja kun hän yksinään virui vuoteellaan tähän tapaan kuin nytkin, niin
tuli se sormennosto — ei se tullut mieleen, se tuli siihen viereen,
ikäänkuin itsellään. Hän luuli näkevänsä mitä se oli, vaikkei osannut
eikä halunnutkaan sitä sanojen muodossa ajatella. Hän vain katsoi
tuota unhosta palannutta seikkaa vakavasti, jokseenkin samoin, kuin
hän oli sitä katsellut sinä ukkosiltana niinkauan kuin jyrinää kesti.
Kivun kiristyessä ennenkuin hän rupesi hourailemaan, hän ajatteli,
melkein päätti, että jos hän paranee, niin hän menee ripille. Ei hän
sillä kertaa sormeaan nostanut eikä oikein tiennyt oliko hän edes
päättänyt vai ajatellutko vain. Toivuttuaan hän koetti toisten puheista
tarkkailla, mitä hän oli hourinut, mutta eivät ne muusta tietäneet,
kuin että hän oli kovasti huhtonut riihellä Pekkas-Villen kanssa.

Jussi toipui, mutta tunsi ettei hänen sinä kesänä ollut enempää
yrittämistä kosteisiin uittotöihin. Hän jäi talonjussin mieheksi. Tämä
kipu oli tuonut mukanaan rippijutun, pienen lisän ukkosjuttuun...

Ei saanut kylä nähdä sitä ihmettä, että Kovasen Jussi olisi mennyt
ripille, mutta erään toisen tapauksen kirkonkylän sällit näkivät.
Heitä seisoskeli Pappilan raitilla koko rykelmä, kun provasti palasi
postista, eikä tullut menneeksi ohi puhuttelematta; poikien olo ärsytti
»kirkkoisää». Pojat vastailivat ja kun ukko ärtyneenä vihjasi jotakin
siihen suuntaan, ettei siihen — seurakuntaan — tarvinnut kuulua,
jota ei haluttanut, niin tokasi Jussi, että hän ei kuulu sitten tän
yön perästä. — Ei semmoista asiaa tanhualla puhuta, sanoi rovasti. —
Näytäänpä puhuttavan ja jos pappi vaan avaa kansliansa, niin kyllä
minä olen valmis, sanoi Jussi ja rehvahti provastin rinnalle. Mikäs
siinä ukkoa auttoi — sisälle mentiin ja toiset sällit kylälle hirnumaan
tapausta.

Niin se tapahtui, ja tämä asia ei painunutkaan sinne unhon uumeniin,
jonne olivat painuneet nuo pari entistä juttua, joita ei enää viitsi
mainitakaan. Tämä asia painoi Kovasen sälliä niinkauan kuin hän oli
terve, painoi siitä syystä, että se sällikannalta ilmeisesti oli
jotenkin mukulamainen ja tarpeeton teko. Mutta kun tämä sairaus tuli ja
nopeasti näyttäytyi lopulliseksi kivuksi, niin samalla koko tuo kohtaus
rovastin kanssa muuttui mitättömäksi. Toiset peikot nousivat nurkista
— lapselliset sormennostot ja horjuneet lupaukset. Ja kun tuska näin
taituttuaan lientyi, tuntui siltä kuin hän olisi ne jo keveästi
täyttänyt, tuon sanattoman valan ja hataran lupauksen.

Kun nuori laupiasääninen pappi pian on istuva sängyn vieressä, aavisti
Jussi, että hänestä tulee auttaja ja pastorista autettava. Kovasen
sälli, Kivas-Jussi, oli päässyt uuteen elämänsä kauteen, joka oli
kestävä vain muutamia tunteja.




VANHA VALTIAS


Varhainen ja erittäin suloinen kevätaamu ympäröi Pärsää, Polsaa
ja moniaita muita taloja soman sisäjärven rantamilla. Seinät
ja savupiiput, viirisalot ja vihannoivat kotikoivut, kaikki ne
heiastelivat samaa elpymisen hurmaa. Siinä olisi kyllä ollut nähtävää
runoilijalle, joka kuvailee jykeviä, turpeeseen pureutuneita,
raadannan jalostamia suomalaisia talonpoikia: kuinka sukupolvien
taisteluilla nöyryytetty maa muhineen ja sen yllä ilma lintuineen
juhlii työpäivän alkamista... Tällä hetkellä ei kylää tosin ollut
katselemassa muita kuin paikkakuntalainen aamuvirkku rysänkokija ja
hän ei ollut runoilija. Kun hän katseli kylää vesiltä, teki se kyllä
vaikutelmansa häneenkin. Kirkastuva ja lämpenevä aamu antoi hänen
vaistomaisesti kokonaisuutena tajuta edessään aukenevan elämänilmiön,
kyläkunnan vaiheineen ja juonineen. Ja luonnon hurma ja yksinäisyys
vaikuttivat sen, että hän, nälkiintynyt mökkiläinen, katseli vauraita
taloja tyynemmin ja ikäänkuin syvemmin. Hän katseli muiden muassa
Pärsän pienempää asuinrakennusta ja arveli itsekseen, että sen katon
alla voi hyvinkin muuan äijänkäriläs juuri tällä hetkellä vedellä
viimeisiään; voi olla sen aikakauden päätöshetket, jona Pärsän vaari on
tätä maailmaa asunut. — Mutta sai kuin saikin vaan nähdä tuon Polsan
Rantavainion joutuvan Pärsän haltuun. Mahtaa nyt kuolla keveästi.

Märkä melan lapa läikähteli aamuvalossa, säestellen miehen mielikuvia,
joilla ei ihan vielä ollut vastaavaisuutta todellisuudessa.

Tällä kyläkunnan aamulla oli jo toinenkin katselijansa: Pärsän
talon vaari seisoi juuri samalla hetkellä niinkuin jäkälöitynyt
tuulikaadon kanto keskellä talon pihamaata ja olisi voinut hyvin
nähdä rysämiehen, jos olisi sattunut sinne päin vilkaisemaan. Mutta
vaarilla oli nyt muuta katseltavaa. Hän ei ollut viikkokausiin käynyt
ulkosalla, eikä taannoin oltu luultu hänen enää ulos kykenevänkään
— oli luultu Pärsän nuoren isännän jo pääsevän isästään ja samalla
muonanmaksustaan. Ankara hengenahdistus oli tavannut vaarin jäitten
lähdön aikana; hän oli viettänyt monta yötä keinutuolissa läähättäen,
kun ei voinut olla pitkänään. Koko aikana hän ei kysellyt mitään
ulkomaailman asioita, mutta hän mietti monet mietteet, höpisi itsekseen
ja ravisteli päätään. Häntä kiusasi turvattomuuden tunne; Pärsän talo
oli hajoomassa, kuten koko maailma. Poika oli nainut onnettomasti vain
kiusatakseen isäänsä, maksoi väelle kalliita palkkoja ja oli tuttua
kaikenlaisten lautakuntien kanssa, jotka erottelivat torppareille
maita. Isännäksi tultuaan se oli oikein järjestelmällisesti alkanut
kiusata isäänsä. Kapinarähinöitten alussa oli uhitellen jättänyt
talonsa ja lähtenyt seikkailemaan;: silloin vaari oli melkein kironnut
hänen kevytmielisyyttään. — No niin — punikit kyllä sitten kukistettiin
ja pojalla oli kunnianmerkki, mutta mitä siitä oli hyvää, kun sitten
naitiin piikoja, annettiin ojurisällein korotella palkkojaan ja
kumarreltiin kaiken maailman lautakuntia, jotka marssivat taloon
milloin viljaa, milloin maita ryöstämään. Koko sotimisen tarkoitus oli
ja pysyi Pärsän vaarille käsittämättömänä — kun ei sitten kumminkaan
voiton hedelmiä nautittu.

Näitä vaari ehti miettiä tuhanteen kertaan sillaikaa kun jäät lähtivät
ja hänen loppuansa odotettiin. Mutta siinä ilma vähitellen kirkastui
ja keveni ja tunkeutui kiertoteitä vaarin vastahakoisiin keuhkoihin
ja sydämyksiin. Ajettuneet sääret alkoivat sulaa ja hän rupesi
huomaamattaan nukahtelemaan. Silloin muuttui hänen mielialansakin; tuli
sisuksiin omituinen mietous, joka oikeastaan oli ellottavaa, mutta
jolle ei mitään voinut. Sitä vaille, ettei jo ruvennut tunnustelemaan
syntejään. Vain se seikka, että miniä — joka vaarin mietouden turvissa
oli alkanut lähennellä — ilmeisesti vaaniskeli hänen papinkaipuutaan,
lisäsi vaarissa terveellistä tympeyden tunnetta koko asiaa vastaan.
— Semmoisien papittelujen kanssa saa olla varovainen, etenkin jos
ämmät omasta alotteestaan pääsevät niitä touhuamaan: jos sattuukin
paranemaan, niin kuinkas silloin on housujen laita. Pitää nyökytellen
kuunnella jonkun hurskaan liikuttajan jaaritusta ja laupiaasti hyväksyä
kaikkinainen pehmeys. Muuten saa kuulla, että pehmenitpä sinäkin
kipeänä.

Pappia ei tuotu ja vaari tunsi toipuvansa. Päivä paistoi ja vaarin
mieli ikäänkuin hajosi sadoiksi säikeiksi, jotka levottomasti
suuntautuivat ympäröivään maailmaan. Tänä aamuna hän herätessään
havaitsi auringon jo olevan nousemassa.

— On hyvin sen näköistä kuin kävelisi Polsan Iisakki tänä aamuna
Rantavainiolla nautiskelemassa siitä, että se nyt lopulta on Polsalle
jäänyt.

Hetken päästä vaari jo seisoi pihamaalla ja västäräkit tirskuttivat
hänen ikivanhalle talvipalttoolleen. Tarmo ja tuo viime aikojen
kiusallinen mietous taistelivat koko hänen olemuksessaan. Suloinen ja
outo uupumus pyrki kuiskaamaan, ettei hänen nyt tällaisena aamuna ja
tässä tilassaan pitäisi ajatella niitä ajatuksia eikä tahtoa niitä
tahtomuksia, joihin toisaalta vietti veti. Olihan hän muka rikas
mies, jonka ei tarvinnut huolehtia tämän maailman asioista. — Niin
kai, mutta muona on kiinnitetty tähän taloon ja jos talo nypistellään
tyhjiin, niin silloin se on kiinnitetty ilmaan... Ja mikäs estää
jotakin lautakuntaa jonain päivänä sanomasta, että sinun rahoillasi
ostetaan palstoja kaiken maailman linnasta päästetyille suutareille ja
kraatareilie... Istunpahan sentään tuohon kivelle seuraamaan, kuinka
kauan piisaa aamu-unta talollisella, joka on nainut piikansa. Piialla
tietenkään ei muuta olekaan kuin... ja unta.

— Kuinka minä sille oikeastaan tulin tämän taloni antaneeksi?
Kyllästyin tämän maailman äänioikeuksiin ja muihin köyhälistöihin,
luulin nuoren miehen paremmin jaksavan. Ämmät liversivät, että se käy
naimassa siellä ja siellä — phyh — nyt makaa kamarissaan piikansa
vieressä, vaikka kello tulee viisi. Minä valvon, mutta en hallitse
taloa. Sitä ei hallitse kukaan, sen näkee ihan maan pinnastakin. On
niinkuin tuo kovakuoriainenkin jo olisi täysin varma siitä, ettei
sillekään kukaan mitään mahda. Äläs huoli, siihenpä jäit... Nuo sarat
ovat niinkuin tuohon heitetyt, mutta sittenkään minä en niitä enää saa.
Ne voidaan vaikka myydä. _Myydä — maata!_

Tässä aamuisessa yksinäisyydessä näiden sanojen kaamea sisältö täysin
paljastui vaarille. Sehän on samaa kuin myisi omaa elävää lihaansa.
Jollei ihminen eläissään pyri _lisäämään_ tiluksiaan, niin mitä varten
semmoinen ihminen elää? Jolla nyt kerran on tiluksia, eikä ole mikään
hyyryhuoneissa asuva herraskepsu.

Hallita tiluksia ja kyetä niitä lisäämään! — se on miehen elämän himo
ja kiihotin. Kun minulla olisi poika, josta minä tietäisin, että se
aina niin jatkaa, että minun kohdallani aina niin tulee jatkumaan, niin
minä kuolisin... Kas mikä voima piilee tämmöisessä kylässä, noissa
rakennuksissa ja noissa pelloissa. Se on juuri sitä, sitä... Tässä minä
istun ylläni tämä palttoo ja minä tiedän, mitä minä tahdon — ja minä
lähden tästä sinne, minä en ole sitä menettänyt.

Hekumallinen kaiken omistamisen harhakuva hykerrytti vaarin vanhoja
hermoja. — Polsan Iisakki on minun viholliseni — on minulla sentään
edes vihollinen. Minä omistan vielä...

Mielikuvat jatkuvat: — Vainioilla uurastaa sata miestä ja minun nähdään
tulevan tuota tietä pitkin. Minulla on valta määrätä missä liikutaan ja
missä ei liikuta päivällä ja yöllä. Minä saan ajaa pois kenen tahdon,
saan sanoa, kuka kenenkin nai, kaikki, kaikki on minun. Niin on aina
maailman ääriin, vahva kurin side sitoo tiukkaan järjestykseen kaikki,
kaikki. Maailma on kerrankin vapaa juonittelijoista ja rikkauden
tavoittelijoista. Ihminen saa rauhan, minä niinkuin muutkin.

Vaarin korkein mielikuva oli saavuttanut täyden valtavuutensa ja
lumovoimansa. Hän katseli taivasta, joka levisi kaiken yli, se oli
kaiken tämän olevaisen uhkea kattolaitos, sen alla kaikki oli ja
hän itse seisoi keskellä. Maailma on suuri ja suloinen ja sitä on
hallittava... Kun ensin niin olisi, voisi ihminen ruveta ajattelemaan
sitäkin, mitä papit ämmille ja lellerimäisille äijille vatkuttavat.
Silloin voisin puhella Jumalan kanssa.

Mutta muuta ei tarvittu kuin jälleen yksi silmäys Pärsän taloon ja
mielikuva alkoi ahdistaa. — Koko muu maailma on juuri vyörymässä
Pärsää kohden, hän, vaari, on sittenkin isäntä, häntä haetaan, hänen
on pidettävä Pärsä paikoillaan. Maailma ei määrää Pärsän oloja, ei
lautakunnat eikä ruokakunnat, ei niin kauan kuin minä hengitän, ja minä
hengitän vielä. Tuossa on Pärsän peltoja ja nuo ovat muun maailman
peltoja, eivät ne ole yhtäläisiä, elleivät muutu Pärsän pelloiksi.
Teitä on olevinaan rikkaita, mutta te olette typeriä ja veteliä, teidän
varanne eivät ole sitä lajia, joka painaa... Nämä pellot ja tuo talo
ja sitten vielä yksi pelto — sinne minä nyt menen, minä otan sen, otan
omin käsin...

Vaarin rintakehässä jutkahti ilkeästi ja silmissä sumeni.
Kuolemanajatus käväisi tajunnassa. Hän nousi ja lähti kuin sitä paeten
etenemään Rantavainiolle päin. Hän tunsi voittaneensa kilpailun, kun
pääsi vainion kulmaukseen.

Sen piti olla Polsan vainio, mutta Pärsän vaari ei sitä tällä hetkellä
muistanut. Se oli hänen vainionsa, hänen nelikymmenvuotiasten
tarmokkaitten juoniensa rakas esine. Kuinka somasti sen sarat
notkahtivat tästä rantaan päin, kuinka se oli multavaa ja kuinka siinä
nytkin ruis vihoitti! Oli kuin se ruis vieläkin olisi ilkkunut hänelle
Polsan vaarin menestystä, — vaikkei sekään vaari enää Polsaa hallinnut
— oli lapsettomana luovuttanut talonsa etäiselle sukulaiselleen, josta
Pärsän vaari puolestaan ei halunnut mitään tietää. Tämän vainion
kupeella seistessään edusti hän Pärsää ja maan omistajana oli yhä
Polsan Iisakki. He olivat ne kylänmiehet, jotka tästä maasta olivat
käyneet hoviräätit ja sinaatit, joiden tähden kylän isojako oli
viipynyt vuosikymmeniä. Kolme maamittaria oli ehtinyt kuolla ennen kuin
tämä asia oli päättynyt, jääden vainio lopullisesti Polsan haltuun
vaarien väistyttyä ohjaksista molemmissa taloissa.

Mutta isäjumala ei ollut luonut ainoatakaan kapanalaa, joka niin
olisi sopinut Pärsälle kuin tämä vainio. On arveluttavaa puhua Pärsän
vaarin rakkaudesta, kun hän ei itse semmoista sanaa tuntenut, ja
oli omasta puolestaan käyttänyt sitä eläissään vain yhden kerran ja
silloinkin toisen perässä: vihillä ollessaan. Mutta tätä vainiota hän
oli viidettäkymmentä vuotta rakastanut. Kun maailma Pärsän vaarista
joskus tuntui mahdottomalta, sovitti hän askeleensa tänne päin ja oitis
elpyi elinvoima. Kun hän tänä aamuna pitkästä ajasta nousi jalkeille,
tiesi hän tajunsa pohjassa, että hän tänne lopulta kävelee. Ja kun
rinnassa sitten pahaenteisesti jutkahti, niin hän lähti rientämään.
Hän eli tästä vainiosta ja niin kauan kuin eli myös Polsan Iisakki,
ei ollut hätää. Saattoi yhä odottaa sitä päivää, jona Iisakki saisi
nähdä maan joutuvan Pärsälle. Se päivä saattoi tulla, vaikkei Pärsän
vaarin mietomielinen poika piikoineen näyttänytkään välittävän isänsä
ponnistuksista tässä enempää kuin muussakaan.

Kuume oli noussut Pärsän vaarin ruumiiseen ja hänen täytyi läähättäen
pudottautua maantien pientarelle. Kuolemanajatus kävi päälle yhä
tiukemmin. Hän katseli vaisusti käsiään ja palttootaan, yrittäen
nautiskella siitä, että palttoo oli paikattu ja nuhruinen. Oli kuin
se olisi ollut viimeinen uskollinen ystävä, rikkaan miehen ikivanha
palttoo. Kyllä Rantavainiokin oli ystävä, mutta se oli siinä maaemon
pinteessä eikä voinut lähteä mukaan — ja sitä raateli vieras käsi.

— Kyllä kai minä nyt kuolen — saisi tulla pappikin, mutta ei ole sillä
minulle mitään sanomista — miehellä, jolla ei ikinä ole ollut omia
vainioita. Näinkö kuolen, tähänkö jään, enkö saa mitään —? Jyrkkä aita
erotti hänet vielä Rantavainion turpeesta. Väsynyt silmä himoitsi
sinne, lepäämään, nukahtamaan.

Mutta silloin kuului takaa sykähyttävä ääni:

— Ruistaskos kattelet? — Se oli Polsan Iisakin ääni. Vaari käänsi
hitaasti sairaan päänsä sinne päin ja vastasi:

— Saan kai minä sitä maantieltä kattella yhtä hyvin kuin sinäkin
irvistellä.

Polsan vaari ei oikein ymmärtänyt naapurin sanoja, mutta jatkoi
kumminkin parhaalta lautamiestyylillään:

— Niin, hyvä veli, sinä riitelit sitä minulta kaiken ikäsi etkä saanut,
mutta nythän se vainio on Pärsän perästäkin.

— Häh? Vaarin katse oli kuin iskua odottavan eläimen, kun hän vilkaisi
toisen kasvoihin nähdäkseen, puhuiko tämä totta.

— Sinä taidat, hyvä mies, olla sekaisin. Viime viikollahan meidän
Heikki sen myi Teidän Kallelle. Juu-juu, niinhän se lopulta kävi.

Polsan vaari oli kartellut naapurinsa katsetta, mutta kun hän nyt sinne
päin silmäsi, niin hänkin hätkähti. Pärsän vaarin kasvot sinersivät ja
silmissä oli harittava ilme. Niinpä niin — Polsan Iisakki tunsi sillä
hetkellä lopullisesti ja peruuttamattomasti voittaneensa. Hän oli
elänyt tämän hetken, oli itse saanut antaa tuon iskun riitaveljelleen.
Tämä tiedonanto vainion _vapaaehtoisesta_ myynnistä oli melkein kuin
kuolinisku tuolle läähättävälle miehelle. Pärsä ei enää voinut sitä
maata _voittaa_, Rantavainio oli häneltä ikuisesti mennyt sen tavan
tähden, jolla se oli tullut. Polsan vaari syljeskeli arvokkaita
lautamiehen sylkyjään ja puhua naskutteli edelleen:

— Juu-juu, keveämminhän ne nykyajan miehet luopuvat maistaan kuin me
vanhasta palttoostamme, hm. Ei ole sinunkaan talossasi enää torpparia
enempää kuin minunkaan talossani. Ensin myi teidän Kalle niinkuin
alkajaisiksi kupparille sen pienen plätin, siitä se aikoi, ja viime
viikolla sitten myivät molemmat kaikki mitä jälellä oli. Sai teidän
talo sentään tästä nätin korvauksen, mutta Heikki ei näy välittävän
mistään. Niinhän se on, niinhän se on. Taidat olla huonovointinen aina
vaan...

Pärsän vaari kuuli tämän kaiken niinkuin etäisen huminan, näki Polsan
Iisakin astelevan pois päin, tajusi, että kylässä jo kaikkialla oltiin
ylhäällä. Näköpiirin laidasta lähestyi automobiili, Pärsän vaarin
erikoisesti vihaama hevosten kauhu. Tyynemmätkin hevoset sitä pirua
pelkäsivät eivätkä parhaatkaan saavuttaneet. Kun se ajoi suoraa tien
kohtaa, näytti siltä kuin se olisi syöksynyt hänen päällensä — nyt
aivan erikoisesti ilkkumaan häntä, talonpoikaa. Hiljentävät vielä
vauhtiaan ja katsovat alas niinkuin mierolaiseen. — Siinä meni herroja,
mitäs Rantavainio on niitten silmissä, mitä minä ja minun taloni, joka
ei ole minun, vaan enemmän sen piian... Siinä meni herroja ja tuolla
tulee uusia, kaksi kenonenää, maatonta pussiselkäsoovaria seteleineen,
joita ovat herroilta saaneet... vetelevät palkkoja, mistä tahtovat...
eivät ole edes kunnon kerjäläisiä.

Tämä Pärsän vaarin viimeinen aamuhetki, joka oli alkanut hiljaisesta
pihasta, kokosi kaiken tuskan tähän yhteen tuokioon maantien
pientarelle, toi siihen lähelle, mutta piti sittenkin erillään. Teki
mieli edes kepillään heristää jotakin, jota aivot eivät enää jaksaneet
selvästi määritellä. Hän ei jaksanut enää mitään edes vihata, sillä
mikään ei näyttänyt enää häntä huomaavan. Yhä yltyvä tunne pitkästä,
laajasta tappiosta kuristi tainnoksiin vanhan miehen.

Suloinen aamu kohosi päiväksi ja painui vähitellen leppeäksi illaksi.
Kylä eli elämäänsä ja koki tapauksiaan, joita toiset kuulivat ennemmin,
toiset myöhemmin. Muutamia ei kuultu koskaan. Kun aamullinen rysämies
taas oli menossa ehtookokiomelleen, sai hän sivumennen kuulla, että
Pärsän vaari makasi tajuttomana viimeisillään — oli aamulla varhain
pyörtynyt maantien viereen ja sieltä korjattu, kun pari kulkumiestä
oli tuonut tietoa. Mökin mies hätkähti ensin ja ihmetteli itsekseen
painuessaan piennarpolkua ruuhelleen: kuinka hän oli sen jo silloin
aamulla niin aavistanut. Saa nähdä, onko nyt kaloja, kun on näin
ihmeellinen päivä...




ERÄÄN ISÄN KUOLEMA


Suutari Salmen elämä on nyt kokonaisuutena katseltavissa ja
arvosteltavissa, sillä se on päättynyt. Eilen aamulla hän sai
halvauksen ja tänä aamuna hän tuntoihinsa tulematta kuoli. Hän oli
perheen päämies, vieläpä varsin itsetietoinen, joten hänen elämänsä
rata läheisesti koskettaa muutamien muidenkin ihmisyksilöitten elämää.
Tarjoutuisi siis nähtäväksi pieni silmukka suuren inhimillisen elämän
verkkokudoksesta, jos sellainen jotakuta huvittaisi. Mutta sisällystä
sitä on jo tässäkin päivässä.

Salmelta jäi kaksi poikaa, toinen neljän toinen yhdentoista vuotias.
Ne ovat nyt eräässä saman kylän talossa väliaikaisesti, siksi kunnes
heidät ehditään vakinaisesti sijoittaa. Nuorempi itkee tylsää, raakaa
itkua. Hänen tajussaan säilyy muutamia kiinteitä kohtia isän elämän
kuvasta niiltä parilta vuodelta, jotka hän muistaa ja jotka nyt
humisevat hänen tajussaan pitkänä epämääräisenä ajan merenä. Muutos
tuli kovin äkkiä; vielä paria tuntia aikaisemmin oli kaikki tukevasti
ennallaan. Reino seippaili maantiellä yllään sekavia vaatekappaleita:
isän vanha hattu, Paavon takki ja saappaat. Hän kulki rehvastellen ja
kiviä nakellen, huulilla reimakkaan sällilaulun säkeitä: »— kotoitin
olen minä korlvetta... toitta titä tippuvi torlvetta...» Tahtien
korkokohdissa kimmahti aina kivi ja ruumiin liikunnot kuvastelivat
tappeluhaluista raittisankaria.

Sieltä nousi silloin ahdetta ylös iso mies pyöräänsä taluttaen, nousi
niinkuin musta pilvi mäen takaa. Nelivuotias tunsi hyvin nuo ilkeät
pitkät viikset ja kellertävät hampaat. Isä oli sitä miestä monesti
akkunasta katsellut ja irvinyt.

— Mitäs se nuori Salmi täällä hummeroi, kysyi vieras saaden vastauksen
asemesta tiukan hellittämättömän katseen. — Onko isäs kotona? jatkoi
pitkäviiksi kyselyään ja kun ei siihenkään saanut vastausta, alkoi
nousta pyörälleen. Silloin kuului hatun alta:

— Mitä te tulle merlenteerlaa?

Jos päivä olisi päättynyt toisin kuin päättyi, ei Salmen suutari olisi
väsynyt Reinon ja poliisin kohtausta nauramasta. Mutta päivä oli
valjennut suurempia asioita varten.

Poliisi ajoi pyörällään Salmen mökin ohi. — —

Niemen mökkiin se jo poikkesi, ja muutaman hetken kuluttua näkyi
Paavo juoksevan kanisteri sylissä kotoa suolle päin. Yritti juosta
rakennusten varjossa, niin ettei Niemelle olisi näkynyt.

Mutta kun Paavo oli pysähtynyt suon reunaan, kuului portailta isän
epätoivoinen kiljaisu: »Älä siihen!»

— Pane siihen vaan, huusi poliisi, joka Niemen äijän seurassa oli
ilmestynyt naapurin portaille.

Hölmistyneenä Paavo kääntyi ympäri, niin että hänen taakkansa hyvin
näkyi sekä Salmen että Niemen pihaan, laski sitten astiansa siihen
paikkaan ja lähti poraten pyrkimään kotia kohden. Salmi oli kadonnut
rappusiltaan tuvan kätköön. Muutamien mökkien akkunoista näkyi naisten
päitä ja pihoista töllistelivät lapset. Töllisikermän henkeen oli äkkiä
virinnyt aavisteleva jännitys. Kello lähenteli yhdeksää kauniina aamuna
toukokuun lopulla.

— Minä myöhästyn koulusta, parkui Paavo, kun poliisi ehkäisi hänen
pakoyrityksensä.

— Niin sinä nyt vähän myöhästyit, mutta kyllä sinä silti todistuksen
saat ensi käräjillä, laski poliisi karheata leikkiään.

— Päästä poika kouluun — minä se olen, joka asioista vastaan, kuului
suutarin jyrkkä ääni jälleen tuvan portailta.

— Älä ole äijä huolissasi, kyllä minä kuulustan läksyt nyt tällä
kertaa. Käydään pirttiin. Niemi tulee kanssa.

Paavon oli mentävä sisälle ja Reinokin hiipi epäröiden pienen pihan
laitaan. Kyllästetty jännitys täytti ilman; ympäristön mökit näyttivät
henkeä pidellen odottavan, mitä tästä mökistä nyt oli tuleva. Pienestä
pojasta tuntui siltä kuin olisi häntä työnnetty jostakin pois, niinkuin
olisi jotain juuri nyt kuristettu. Nuo rakkaat suuret vaatelenhotkin
kävivät vieraiksi ja noloiksi.

Jo lähti poliisi tuvasta. Ovessa kuului sanovan:

— Kyllä minä ilmoitan koululle, minkä tähden poika myöhästyi. Meni
sitten isän kanisteria kantaen siitä pojan ohi niinkuin humiseva vaara,
Niemen äijä toimekkaana perässä kammertaen. Jo olivat maantiellä.
Mutta pirtissä olivat nyt isä ja Paavo kahdenkesken tänä ihmeellisenä
aamupäivän hetkenä, kun Paavon olisi jo aikaa pitänyt olla koulussa.
Näkyväinen pelko oli lähtenyt, mutta näkymätön pelko tuntui kasvavan.
Kuuluiko tuvasta isän ääntä? Kuului — ja nyt kuului Paavon parkaisu.
Reino lähti juoksemaan puuvajaa kohden. Viriävän itkun tahdissa
tuntui takaapäin joku vihamielisesti tömistävän hänelle jalkojaan. Jo
juoksikin Paavo alas portaita kirja kädessä, tavallista koulutietään
tavoittaen, juoksi edelleen maantietä, kunnes livahti näkymättömiin.
Nyt oli isä yksin tuolla tuvassa. Sen jylhä ja käsittämätön olo tuntui
etsivän Reinoa puuvajasta kurittaakseen häntäkin jostain, niinkuin
äsken Paavoa.

Kurittajaa ei kuitenkaan kuulunut. Kului hetki, kului toinen ja
puuvajassa viipyvän pojan jähmetys suli vähitellen haaveelliseksi
uinailuksi, josta alkuperäinen pelko oli valahtanut pois. Yhä paisuva
auringonpaiste vietteli takaisin maantielle — tupaa oli kuitenkin paras
vielä välttää. Jospa lähtisi oikein pitkälle kävelylle koululle päin.
Kai sieltä jo Paavokin pian tulisi.

Näillä hetkillä istui yhdentoistavuotias Paavo kanervikossa kylän
laidassa ja ajatteli pitkää päivää, joka oli edessä, katseli kirjaa,
jonka lähteissään umpimähkään oli siepannut. Ei käynyt meneminen
kouluun, ei liioin palaaminen kotiin. Mikä oli nyt edessä? Häpeä ja
katkeruus täytti mielen. Eihän hän ollut ymmärtänyt sitä muualle viedä
kuin sinne missä se joskus ennenkin oli ollut, tietyllä paikalla suohon
upotettuna. Ja miksei äijä hoida itse kanistereitaan — perkele, hän
melkein ääneen lausui muistaessaan, kuinka raivostunut isä oli häntä
pusertanut. Jos lähtisi täältä, jättäisi kaikki ja menisi etäisiin
kyliin renkipojaksi. Kyllä se kumminkin minut vielä hakkaa, niinkuin
äitivainaankin joskus. Hiljaisessa lienteässä jälki-itkussa poika
kirjaansa tuijottaen muisteli niitä aikoja, jolloin äiti kuoli. Se oli
talvea, joulunpyhien tienoota. Isä tuli jostain kotiin juovuksissa
raivoten ja ajoi heidät pakkaseen, äidin ja hänet. Pian sitten tuli
Reino ja äiti kuoli sille sijalleen. Yhtenä pitkänä ja sekavana jaksona
kuvastuivat seuraavat vuodet, niinkuin ne olisivat hellittämättä
pyrkineet juuri tätä aamua kohden. Tuolla päin on mökki ja siellä isä
nyt on. Tuolla on koulu ja siellä opettaja — ja poliisi. Ajatus painui
taas heltyneenä paikoilleen, päivän paistaessa paljaisiin jalkoihin ja
käsiin.

Mutta samassa tulvahti lämmin aalto Paavon koko olemuksen läpi. Tiellä
asteli Reino tutuissa tamineissaan eteenpäin pyrkien. Onko se kiusannut
Reinoakin? Meitä on nyt kaksi poikaa taivasalla.

— Reino!

Pieni kulkija pysähtyi ja katsoi tiukasti mäkeen päin.

— Tule tänne, huudahti Paavo hillitysti.

Mutta kun Reino yhä jatkoi menoaan, nousi Paavo seisaalleen ja lähestyi
maantietä. Oli hyvä että tähän paikkaan ei sopinut mistään nähdä.

— Tule tänne, mennään mäkeä pitkin.

Reino kyllä hymyili silmät suurella, mutta oli kummallisen
umpimielinen, niinkuin olisi pelännyt Paavoakin. Ei se osannut mitään
selittää — muuta kuin että isä oli pirtissä ja ettei se häntä ollut
kurittanut. Mutta kuinka poika oli päässyt tuolla lailla tulemaan juuri
akkunoitten ohi? Ehkäpä kotona sittenkin oli tapahtunut jotain uutta,
johon tämä kaikki hukkuisi.

Olihan sitä tapahtunut uutta sellaista, josta pojat, vanhempi niinkuin
nuorempikin, vasta pitkien hetkien päästä saivat selvän ja jonka he
oppivat käsittämään vasta lähipäivien ja viikkojen kuluessa.

Paavo ei ollut huomannut, mihin tilaan hän paetessaan jätti isänsä.
Jos hän olisi sattunut ovessa vilkaisemaan taakseen, olisi hän nähnyt
äskeisen kurittajansa hoipertuvan sängylle pitkäkseen ja siihen jäävän.
Juuri sillä hetkellä, jolloin pieni poika pakeni puuvajaan ja isompi
maantielle, sumeni heidän isänsä tajunta hiljallensa tältä maailmalta.
Ne verisuonet, jotka jo kohta neljän vuosikymmenennen ajan olivat
tuon sisukkaan ja yritteliään miehen aivoihin verta kuljettaneet,
ratkeilivat nyt tänä aamupäivän hetkenä, ja samea elon neste täytti
valtoinaan salaperäiset kudossokkelot. Sitkeä sydän lähetti verta
lähettämistään, tietämättä mitä oli tapahtunut. Heikkenevä ajatus
totesi, että hän sentään makasi omassa pirtissään, mutta se ehti
vielä kouristuakin todetessaan, ettei elämä sittenkään ollut antanut
lähimainkaan sitä, mitä tämä mies oli siltä vaatinut. Suunnaton
hätä värisytti Salmen suutarin tajunnan rippeitä. Niinkuin joinakin
pahansuopina, nyt valtaan päässeinä vihollisina näyttäytyivät Jumala,
viina, vaimo, lapset, työansiot — etenkin ne. Kuinka kierosti, kuinka
raivostuttavan ilkeästi olikaan tuo pääpeikko häntä piinannut. Tässä
nopeasti kiitävässä loppumenossa kiihtyi sen ilkunta kaikkikäsittäväksi
puristukseksi. Hän ei ollut saanut yliotetta siitä pirusta, vaikka hän
perin pohjin tunsi sen metkut. Elämä, sinä saatana — minä en ole saanut
sinulta enempää imetyksi. Minä olen tienannut ja osannut tienata, mutta
sinut tarvitsisi tienata kokonaan ja se on mahdotonta. Mitkä vuodet
tässä olivatkaan ja menivät — ryssän saapastilaukset ja kapinan tuhina.
Istuin punasten kasarmilla neulomassa ja pieksin suutani — rahaa tuli,
pärjäsin valkosten kanssa, pirun hyvin pärjäsin — kun Lepistön akka
vietiin pohjoiseen, pääsin minä sen mökin ja tavaroitten hoitelijaksi
— ja hyvän teki. Nousua, nousua se oli, kiihkeätä, niinkuin nyt tämä
painuminen ja puserrus... Kyllä minä olen tiennyt tienaamisen ja viinan
olen tiennyt, että se on voiton merkki: merkki siitä, että voitan ja
hallitsen elämänpirun metkut. Minä juon, koska voin, koska kykenen
imemään tältä maailmalta, mitä siinä on, koska tunnen metkut... Mutta
aah, nyt vyöryy kaikki, koko pirun röykkiö minun ylitseni, niinkuin
olisi se juuri löytänyt uuden, mahdottoman metkun, josta minä en ole
aavistanutkaan, enkä ehdi tällä hetkellä aavistaa, koska menen suhisten
jonnekin... Akka kuoli — sekin tulee nyt niinkuin jokin vieras voitto
minun, ylitseni — ei se kuollut tällä tavalla, se oli jo tuota uutta
metkua, jonka minä nyt vasta tässä suhinassa huomaan, kun en enää
voi... ja mukulat kuolivat ja ne jotka elävät, niitä en hallitse. Ei
ehtinyt Reino päästä käsiksi metkuihin ja Paavo ei pääsekään koskaan.
Ooh, ne juoksevat jonnekin pois minusta ja otteestani, joka heltiää...

Sellaista tuo tummapintainen miehenkäppyrä tunsi noina muutamina
sekunteina, kun valtointa verta valui revenneistä suonista aivoihin.
Sitten tuli lepo; väkevä, raaka maailmankuva ikäänkuin painoi hänet
syvälle allensa. Sydän löi ja rinta hengitti niinkuin jossakin
muualla. Kun pojat lopulta tulivat tupaan, luulivat he hänen nukkuvan,
vaikka se tuntuikin kummalliselta tämmöisenä päivänä. He tahallaan
ja vaistomaisesti kolistelivatkin, mutta isä ei vaan herännyt. Sen
oli makuuasentokin hiukan outo; toinen jalka riippui kokonansa yli
sängyn laidan. Epämääräinen aavisteleva kammo hiipi lasten mieliin
kokopäiväisen pelon ja järkytyksen sijaan. Sitä oli jo ollut äsken
ulkona pihaa lähestyessä; Reino oli jo siellä pillahtanut poraamaan,
vaikkei mitään kuulunut eikä näkynyt.

Lapset eivät sanoneet mitään toisilleen, hiiviskelivät vain huoneessa
ja kuuntelivat isän omituista hengitystä. Lähestyivät lopulta
sänkyäkin: nukkuja ei vaan hievahtanut. Seinäkellostakin näkyi veto
olevan loppumaisillaan, pian se pysähtyisi. Kaikki oli outoa ja
kammottavaa. He hiipivät pois pirtistä.

Lasten erikoinen liikuskelu ja olo sekä suutarin kokopäiväinen
näkymättömyys herätti naapurien huomiota. Niemen akka tuli kuistilleen
ja jäi siihen epäröivän näköisenä seisoskelemaan ja katselemaan.
Niinkuin jostakin pakosta Paavo ja Reino vähitellen lähestyivät tuota
lipevää akkaa, jota he muuten vieroivat.

— Mitä Salmi nyt hommailee? kysyi akka.

Oikeastaan olisi Reinon pitänyt vastata, että »mitä te tulle tekee?» —
mutta hän piti nyt suunsa kiinni ja Paavo vastasi omituisen laupiaalla
äänellä: »Se nukkuu.»

— Nukkuu, toisti Niemen akka epäillen ja ikäänkuin pojat unohtaen
katsoi kiinteämmin Salmen mökille päin. — Mitähän nukkumista se
sellainen oikein on, jupisi hän sitten ja kääntyi sisälle omaan
mökkiinsä. Sieltä tuli pian äijäkin ulos. Tehtiin pojille uusia
kysymyksiä, joihin Paavo neuvottomana ja ikäänkuin jotain kartellen
vastaili. Välillä vaiettiin ja tuijoteltiin Salmen mökkiä. Vihdoin
kumminkin alettiin sitä lähestyä, mentiin sisälle ja todettiin, mitä
oli tapahtunut.

Kun toisista mökeistä nähtiin, että Niemen väki siellä viipyi,
paisui uteliaisuus nopeasti ja akkoja ja lapsia alkoi solua Salmen
mökille. Matalaäänisestä puheen sorinasta saivat Paavo ja Reino kuulla
lukemattomia selityksiä, arveluita ja arvosteluja... »Se saksalainen
prii kuuluu olevan semmoista, että siitä meneentyy.» — »Mutta eihän
Salmi ole ollut juovuksissa sitten kun pyhäehtoona — vai oliko se
tänäpänä juovuksissa silloin kun poliisi kävi? Paavo, sinähän olit
sisällä.» — »Kuka sen viimeksi näki ylhäällä? Paavoko? Tarttee puhua
kaikki — kai siitä poliisitutkinto tulee.» Ruikuttava osanotto lapsia
kohtaan pääsi myös pian vauhtiin. Reino alkoi jälleen porata ja
Paavokin nyyhkytti. Ainoa joka ei puhunut mitään, oli sängyllä makaava
suutari.

— Kas kun kellokin on istunut.

— Voi voi jos se tänne kuolee, niin sitten tää on synkkä mökki, kun se
on täällä yksin ruumiina.

— Ei suinkaan se ruumiina enää kellekään mitään tee.

— Kun minä näin — oliko se toissa yönä — semmoista unta, että...

— Älkää te, lapsiparat, poratko, viattomiahan te olette.

Mietittiin, kuinka asiat viisaasti järjestettäisiin. Parasta oli,
että lapset saatettiin Maantielaan yöksi, sehän on kunnan piirimies,
ja jonkun täytyy olla täällä Salmea katsomassa, vaikkei suinkaan sitä
kauan tartte katsoa... Eikä suinkaan ne kunnan haltuun joudu, lapset,
kyllä sillä sen verran olemista on, mutta kyllä Maantielalle sentään
tarttee tieto antaa... Ja kukin koetti puheen lomassa vilkuilla, mitä
siinä oli tavaran puolta näkyvissä, että tietää sitten avisjoonissa
sitä ja sitäkin olleen, vaikkei enää ole... Semmoista on eläminen —
ensin tienaamista ja tienatun säilyttämistä ja sitten avisjooni.

Lapset makasivat yönsä Maantielan pakarissa. Reino nukkui pian, mutta
Paavo valvoskeli kauan vuoteellaan. Isän hahmo ei väistynyt hänen
silmiensä edestä, vuosien mittaisena se oli olevinaan siinä jossakin
lähellä, käsi yhä hänen niskassaan. Tämän paikallaan pysyvän kuvan
ohessa seuloi mieli lukemattomia tapauksia äitivainaasta tähän hetkeen
asti. Tuossa vieressä makasi Reino ja kotimökissä makasi isä. — Isä,
mikä on isä? Unen lähestyessä muuttui muistojen ja mielikuvien tanssi
yhä hurjemmaksi... Isä istui pöydän ääressä ja puhui sammaltaen
yksinään, kun pojat jo olivat vuoteessa. Maistoi välillä pullostaan ja
puhui taas, kunnes kyyneleet alkoivat vuotaa hänen silmistään ja hän
nyyhkytti, yhä puhuen jotain, jota he eivät ymmärtäneet. Sitten isä
nousi ja lähestyi heitä ja ojensi kätensä. Se oli jokin yö, jonka aikaa
ei enää muistanut, mutta jälkeen äidin kuoleman se oli ollut... Sitten
se ei enää ollutkaan isä, vaan jokin muu mies, niinkuin poliisi tai
niinkuin opettaja.

Uni oli lopulta käsittänyt vanhemmankin Salmen pojan ja saattanut hänet
ryöppyävään ajattomaan valtakuntaansa. Aamulla, kun he heräsivät,
saivat he kuulla, että Salmi jo oli loppunut. Se oli pojille jotenkin
vähäpätöinen uutinen. Eilen ehtoolla ja sitten yön unessa oli elämän
kudoksen uusi silmukka heidän kohdaltaan jo alkanut.




MUUAN MIES


1.

Tuohenmaa oli ja on tällä hetkellä sievä salomaan torppa, isohko, vanha
ja hyvin viljelty asumus. Sen ulkonäkö ei vielä ole ehtinyt muuttua,
vaikka sisällä tätä nykyä vallitseekin hyvin sekava olo. Sinne palasi
näet sen Taavetti-vainaan leski poikineen — palasi asiat kuultuaan
mielelläänkin, vaikka sillä lailla ensin Taavetin jätti. Se yrittää nyt
saada sitä asumusta itsenäiseksi, eikä siitä tiedä vaikka saisikin,
Taavetin kuolinpesän nimeen, kun sille jäi kuin jäikin rintaperillinen.
Siellä se nyt on Olka ja joitakin sen hämäriä sukulaisiakin siellä
vähtää. Sen roikan tähden isäntä juuri sitä itsenäistymistä niin
vastaan paneekin. Kyllä hän sen aina Taavetille olisi myynyt ilman lain
pakkoakin, mutta sen ei tullut pantua asiaa alulle, ennenkuin niissä
Olkan kiehinöissä sai sen kuolintautinsa ja siihen sitten niin nopeasti
menehtyi.

Tuon hiljaisen ja hymyileväisen Tuohenmaan Taavetin elämä ehti saada
melko myrskyisen loppusuorituksen, vaikkei sitä kukaan olisi uskonut,
kun muutama vuosi sitten katseli sitä elämää, kun hän vanhan äitinsä
kanssa kahdestaan asuskeli torppaa.

Kuinka jykevän sopusointuinen silloin saattoikaan olla joku elokuinen
sunnuntaipäivä tuon hyvän parin elämässä. Oli juuri osavasti
lauantai-iltana saatu ruis poikki, sen jälkeen vihdottu ja sitten
nukuttu sitä unta, jota voi nukkua vain rukiinviljelijä onnellisesti
sujuneen leikkuun jälkeen. Nuoren miehen kasvot ja kädet, niiden
suonet, hermot ja jänteet ovat täynnä vakiintunutta, leppoisaa voimaa,
kun hän herää semmoisesta unesta. Ihossa tuntuu vielä saunan jälki;
ehtoolla muutettu valkoinen paita ja pyykinväkiset raidit ovat sen
hyvästi säilyttäneet. Aurinko paistaa Tuohenmaan pirttiin, kissa makaa
yöllisen pyyntimatkan jäleltä koivet oikoisenaan poikastensa vieressä,
vanha Siina, Taavetin äiti tuo pöytään vellivatia, pyhäaamun vakinaista
suurusta. Kello osoittaa aikaansa kiiruhtamatta.

Siina on jo vanha ihminen, mutta hän on tasaisesti vanhentunut,
hänessä ei ole mitään erityistä vikaa; näkee, että hänkin on ikänsä
kaiken ollut voimakas ja terve. Ensimäisenä hän aina on ylhäällä
arkiaamuinakin, suurus on valmis Taavetin noustessa. Näin pyhäaamuisin
on varhainen nousu vanhukselle vieläkin mieluisempaa, kun ei siihen ole
mitään pakottavaa syytä. On tällöin niin erinomainen tilaisuus pieneen
keveään aamuhartauteen: lukea kenenkään näkemättä rukous virsikirjasta,
ja sen päätyttyä kirjaa muuten selaillessa antaa mielen omin valloin
toteilla niitä pieniä sanattomia taikoja, joiden noudattaminen on
elämän tällaiseksi hyväksi vakiinnuttanut. Tällaisen sunnuntaiaamun
oikea viettäminen on juuri yksi niitä taikoja. Oikein kauniina
aamuna tuntee ikäänkuin saavansa etukäteen kassaan tuota salattua
elämänvoimaa. Kun siinä muisti kajastelee elettyä elämää, niin ihan
itse näkee, kuinka aina on osannut vältellä kaikkea sellaista, mikä
onnea väijyy...

Taavetti on jo noussut ja syönyt ja tervailee ulkona portailla
saappaitaan, asettaa ne sitten nurkanrakoon sitä varten pistetylle
laudalle kuivumaan. Työsaappaitten tervaus kuuluu myös pyhäaamun
menoon — ei ole vielä kirkonaika läheskään. Pyhäaamuna oleillaan
paitahihasillaan ja paljain jaloin — mikä on oleillessa lämmenneellä
porraskivellä ja pihapoluilla, joutilaana. Siina tulee pirtistä
sylissään kissanpojat ja emo maukuen perässä; hän tuo nekin siihen
pihalle aurinkoon. Pääskyset käyvät pesällään tallin oven päällä
sipaisten joskus lennossaan aivan läheltä ruohostossa urahtelevaa
kissaa. Siinan varhaisesta aamurukouksesta on elämä taas näin lähtenyt
menemään pyhäistä lattiaan. Lukemattomat, vuosikymmeniä jatkuneet
seikat ja suhteet ovat tämän kaiken takana.

Siina ei juuri käynyt kotoa muualla kuin joskus kirkossa, ei liioin
Taavetti muualla kuin myllyssä ja pari kertaa vuodessa Tampereella. Jos
näin pyhäehtoona sattui olemaan tanssi lähettyvillä, saattoi hän mennä
sinnekin; Siina ei sitä vähääkään paheksunut, sillä hän tunsi kotiin
asti, ettei Taavetilla ollut mitään hätää. Taavetti oli tansseissa
ovensuujoukkoa, mutta seurasi sieltä hymyillen ja virkeänä kaikkea mitä
tapahtui ja piti kisailevaa leikkiä tanssitaidottomien poikien kanssa
päästäen joskus äänekkään hihityksen. Hän ei koskaan esiintynyt minään
tekijänä, mutta saattoi kumminkin maanantaiaamuna kahvia juodessaan
kertoilla äidilleen kaikki tanssin aikaiset ja sen jälkeisetkin
sattumukset.

Näin kului äidiltä ja pojalta kahdenkesken kaksikymmentä vuotta vanhan
Tuohenmaan kuoltua. Pyhät ja aret sujuivat vakiintuneeseen tapaansa,
ja perheen varallisuus lisääntyi kaikessa hiljaisuudessa. Taavetti
lähenteli kolmeakymmentä, ennen kuin äidin elämässä ensimäiset
selvät ehtoon merkit esiintyivät, muistuttaen, että muutos kerran on
tuleva. Taavetti huomasi tämän selvemmin jonain saunailtana, kun hän
istui vilvoittelemassa puodin portaalla ja äiti löylyn ja kosteuden
kutistamana meni siitä ohi puolipukeissaan. Jos äidin rinnalla siinä
sattui astelemaan joku työnavussa ollut kylän tyttö — nämä olivat hyvin
hanakoita tulemaan Tuohenmaahan työhön, tietenkin nuoren isännän tähden
— niin näyttäytyi äidin vanhuus sitä selvemmin. Semmoisena hetkenä
saattoi Taavetti unohtua siihen istumaan pitkäksi aikaa ja mitään
ajattelematta tuijottamaan oman mielensä uumeniin.

Siinalla taisi olla joitakin hiljaisia toiveita ja pikku yrittelyjäkin
Taavetin naimisen suhteen, mutta ne eivät ollenkaan sujuneet. Siinan
oli oikeastaan vaikea ajatella siihen ketään toista niinkauan kuin
hän itse oli jalkeilla. Tulee siitä kyllä Taavetille outo häiriö, kun
kerran jää yksinään ilman naisapua, mutta onhan poika täyden miehen
iällä, luonnoltaan vakaa, puhdas ja kykeneväinen. Kyllä se siitä osaa
selviytyä.

Ja niin kävi, että Siina sitten eräänä aamuna jäi sänkyyn ja sieltä
neuvoi Taavetille, mitä tämän sopi tehdä. Taavetti pysytteli sen
päivän kototöissä ja piti silmällä äitiään. Seuraava yö kului hyvin;
äiti ei valittanut eikä ollut muutenkaan levoton. Mutta aamulla
hän pyysi Taavettia lukemaan, mainiten sivut ja kohdat virsikirjan
tekstipuolelta. Oli niinkuin pientä itkun värettä hänen äänessään, kun
hän puhui:

— Minä olen kohta kolmekymmentä vuotta sen joka aamu tehnyt, enkä
jättäisi sitä nytkään tekemättä, mutta en jaksa oikein pidellä kirjaa.

Taavetin lukiessa hän puoliääneen toisti joka sanan. Se oli Tuohenmaan
Siinan viimeinen aamuhartaus.


2.

Taavetti oli sen verran tottunut kaikenlaisiin naisväen toimiin,
ettei hän äitinsä kuollessa joutunut aivan avuttomaksi. Kun tuo
outo tapaus kerran oli asumuksen olon täydellisesti sekoittanut ja
huumannut, ei Taavetista navetassa ja keittiössä hääriminen enää ollut
sen kummallisempaa; se vain tehosti tätä avartunutta yksinäisyyttä.
Tietysti tästä nyt uusi elämä oli alkava, mutta sen johdosta kannatti
kyllä antaa jatkua tämän ihmeellisen juhlan lehmien, lampaitten ja
ruoka-astian seurassa.

Vasta kolmantena päivänä yksin jäänyt torpan poika lukitsi ovensa ja
lähti kirkolle tekemään kuolemanilmoitusta ja hankkimaan arkkua. Hänen
täytyi pappilassa ilmoittaa myös hautauspäivä ja se seikka pakoitti
häntä ajattelemaan asiaa pitemmältäkin. Oli hankittava kantajat ja
niille oli jälleen tarjottava jotain kirkosta palattua. Tätä kaikkea
hän taas ei voinut aivan yksin toimittaa. Talossa tarvittiin naista
jo ennen kuin äiti oli sieltä saatu maan poveen. Siinä tuli pakosta
mieleen äidin leikinlaskut vieraille: että Taavetti on laiska naisissa
käymään, mutta kai hän sitten muistaa lähteä, kun minä tästä ensin
lähden.

Nyt vasta Taavetti huomasi senkin, ettei heillä ollut edes läheisiä
sukulaisia paikkakunnalla; isä ja äitihän olivat muuttaneet
nuoruudessaan tähän muualta, eikä tainnut olla isoja sukuja sielläkään,
koskei hän muistanut niistä koskaan puhutuksi. Ja sen oli Taavetti aina
tuntenut, ettei heidän välinsä naapureihin ollut sama kuin naapureitten
keskenään; jonkinlainen ystävällinen vieraus vallitsi. Ne olivat siinä
ikäänkuin odottavinaan, kuinka Tuohenmaassa nyt elämä järjestyy Siinan
kuoltua.

Eihän Taavetti siinä muuta osannut kuin lähteä puhuttelemaan Tuomiston
Taavaa ja pyytää häntä laittajaksi niinkuin isompiinkin pitoihin. Taava
tuli mielellään jo paria päivää aikaisemmin: missä sen hauskempi oli
pitotavarain kanssa väihkiä kuin tuommoisessa varakkaassa asumuksessa,
jossa ei talon puolesta ollut yhtään vaarallista naissilmää
katselemassa, kuinka paljon mitäkin kului ja mihin kului. Todellinen
autuus aukeni Taavalle, kun hän lopulta jäi vallan yksin asumukseen.
Taavetti ei näet ollut omin päinsä osannut mitään ostaa, lisää oli
lähdettävä hankkimaan. Taavetti oli tarkoittanut, että vain kantajia
kahviteltaisiin. »Mitä minulla täällä sitten ollenkaan tehdään?»
supatti Taava. »Totta kai nyt joitakin naapurejakin käsketään — sanoin
minä jo meidän Seemillekin, että hänkin tulee, kun aattelin, että
Taavetti on niin suruunsa painunut, ettei itse semmoista huomaakaan.
Kyllä Seemi sitä sanoi...» Taavalta tuli suopeata lörpötystä niin
kuin rastaalta — ja Taavetti lähti uudelleen kirkolle. Sillaikaa
sopi Tuomiston Seemin, Taavan uskollisen elämänkumppanin, jollakin
matkallaan poiketa Tuohenmaahan katsomaan, kuinka siellä asiat
sujuivat. Seemillä oli poiketessaan reppu selässä eikä se ollut
unohtunut lähtiessäkään — ja naapurien akkunain takaa virnisteli
moni kellertävä kulmahammas: nähtiin selvästi, että Seemin reppu oli
Tuohenmaassa vahvistunut. Kyllä Tuomiston Taava Seeminsä kanssa haaskan
haistaa...

Vähitellen siinä hautajaisten lähestyessä pääsi tuo kuolinpesän
ympärille kuuluva sivullisten vaaniskelu vauhtiinsa: jokainen pyrki
saamaan kortensa autioituneesta keosta. Naistahan siinä nyt ennen
pitkää tultiin tarvitsemaan — kuka oli pääsevä? Pallilla on Taimi
ripillä käypä niinkuin odottamassa — saa nähdä, eikö Pallin akka ala
sitä sinne keinotella.

Näin olivat tarkkaavaiset naapurit puhelleet noina päivinä, joina
Tuohenmaan Siinan hautaamista valmisteltiin.

Ja kun Taavetti sitten Taavan käskystä oli tällä matkallaan kirkolle,
kohtasi hän parahiksi Pallin Saiman. Hyvin puettu maireasilmäinen
töllin emäntä pysähtyi puhelemaan.

— Niin aina Siina sitten pääsi pois, ei tarvinnut olla vastuksina,
vaikka kyllä mar Taava sen puolesta äitinsä hoitanut olisi, mutta
kuinkas nyt rupee sitten käymään, kun ei ole ollenkaan vaimoihmistä,
kun ei ole tullut ajoissa hankittua sijaista — minä siinä jo sanoin
meidän Taimille, että menisit nyt sinä sinne katsomaan, kuinka Taava
siellä tulee toimeen, kun on sentään lehmiäkin ja äiti aina hoiti niin
hyvin kaikki, mutta Taimi sanoi, ettei hän mene, sanotaan vielä, että
minä tuppaan sinne emännäksi, heh-heh...

Se tästä nyt ainakin oli seurauksena, että Taavetti kutsui
Pallilaisetkin sitten pyhänä hautajaisiin. Ja kun hautajaiset tulivat,
tuppautui Pallin akka tyttärineen kaikkialle, niin että hankki jo
karkoittaa Taavan. Kirkkoon lähdettäessä tahtoi Palliska — kuten Taava
sanoi — vallan välttämättä jäädä sinne Taavaa auttamaan. Tuli pakarissa
sievä rettelö siinä, kun ruumis oli jo reessä. »Saima jää tänne, jos
tahtoo, vaikka kyllä-mar Taava täällä toimeen tulee», sanoi Taavetti,
ja Taava tuiskahti, että: »Kyllä, kun olen tullut tähänkin asti — eikä
kaikenlainen apu sen puolesta ole muuta kuin haitaksi.» Ja Pallin
akka jäi vaan sinne kirkon ajaksi — paimentamaan tyttärensä tulevia
tavaroita. Joku naapuri hymähti pirullisesti ja ajatteli, että jo olet,
Tuohenmaan poika, ämmien vyyhdessä.

Pallin Saima hoiti tyttärensä asiaa niin intohimoisesti, että
»meidän Taimi» joutui kuin joutuikin Tuohenmaahan naisapulaiseksi.
Kahdeksannellatoista oleva, luonteeltaan isänsä tapainen mutta olossaan
äitiään kuvasteleva Taimi liikuskeli Tuohenmaan navetassa ja pakarissa
samaan tapaan kuin lapsi, joka äitinsä neuvojen mukaan vieraille
näyttää monia taitojaan. Oli niinkuin häntä puhuessaankin olisi aina
kevyesti väsyttänyt se suuri viisaus, jonka hän lapsesta alkaen oli
saanut. Toisin silmin hän näki, kuinka Taavetti katseli häntä —
niinhän sen oli määräkin katsella, sitähän äiti oli tarkoittanutkin.
Se oli yhtä luonnollista, kuin aikoinaan rippikoulu, ja yleensä tuo
säännöllinen pyrkimys kaikkinaiseen vaurastumiseen. Kyllä hän voi
Taavetin aivan hyvin ottaa...

Taimi oli toimissaan hidas ja vielä kovin lapsellinen. Kaikki mitä hän
teki, oli oikeastaan vain Pallin vanhaa Saimaa. Taavetin mielestä oli
jotain äitelän hullunkurista siinä, että tuo rusohipiäinen töllin tytär
muka jatkoi hänen äitivainaansa toimia, eikä asia suinkaan parantunut
siitä, että akka itse tuhkatiheään kävi katsomassa, »kuinka se nuori
pari täällä pärjää». Huusholli sujui yhä huonommin: täytyi ottaa
eri ihminen pyykille, apulainen teurastukseen ja vihdoin lampaiden
keritsemiseenkin, kun Taimi ensin oli yrityksissään haavoittanut paria
karitsaa. Muita apulaisia ei olisi saanut ottaa, kuin Pallin akan. Tämä
taas ei joka tarpeeseen mitenkään päässyt, ja Taavetti puolestaan oli
aina silloin huonolla tuulella, kun akka siellä liversi. Pallin tytär
tunsi mielessään jonkinlaista hämääntymistä, kun maailmanjärjestyksessä
tapahtui semmoinen järkytys, ettei Taavetti häntä enää katsellutkaan.
Mitäs tämä tämmöinen nyt oli, kun ei äitikään saanut sitä sujumaan?
Äiti ja tytär alkoivat tuskastua ja riitelivät joskus kahdenkesken
kelpo lailla. »Enhän minä millään sen paremmin voi olla», voivotti
tytär ja äiti epätoivossaan ehdotti Taavetille kihlausta. Kateelliset
naapurit pidättivät henkeään, kunnes heidän jännityksensä suloisesti
laukesi siihen, että Taavetti omin päinsä pestasi itselleen oikean
verevän piian. »Jo katkesi Pallin ämmältä Tuohenmaassa sanka»,
huudettiin töllien akkunapielissä sinä päivänä, jona »meidän Taimi»
muutti takaisin kannollensa kasvamaan.

Uuden piian nimi oli Aina, ja hänellä ei ainakaan ollut ketään
aikeilevaa akkaa takanaan. Hän otti tehtävänsä tavallisen reiman
piian kannalta, liikkui toimissaan lauleskellen ja suoritti ne kyllä
kunnollisesti ja ajallaan, niinkuin semmoisen välttämättömän pahan,
joka maailmanrannalla on kaiken hyvän edellytyksenä. Sillä kun piika
on tehnyt ehtooaskareensa ei mikään estä häntä lähtemästä katsomaan,
onko tällä paikkakunnalla tarjottavana muutakin kuin lannan luomista
ja perunain kuorimista. Tuohenmaastakin oli nyt edustaja paikkakunnan
tansseissa. Jollakin ihmeellisellä tavalla Aina vainusi, missä
sellaisia kulloinkin pidettiin ja aamulla hän tiesi kertoa yhtä ja
toista, mitä tansseissa oli tapahtunut. Osasipa hän jollakin hauskalla
silmän luonnilla tehdä sellaisen kertomuksen isännälleen varsin
viehättäväksi. Taavetti ei ollut koskaan nähnyt hänellä kotiin tullessa
ketään seuralaista.

Tämän Ainan elo ja olo se lopullisesti poisti Tuohenmaan ilmasta vanhan
Siina-vainaan hengen. Työt ja toimet sujuivat taas, vaikkakin tykkänään
toisin ottein; oltiin enemmän niinkuin muutkin asumukset. Taavetilla
oli jokin salainen tunne elämän huonontumisesta, vaikka hän ei voinut
siihen syytä selittää. Hän maksoi veronsa taloon aikoinaan ja yhtä
keveästi kuin ennenkin. Kevät lupasi myös tulla aikoinaan ja entistä
kauniimpana alkaen jo sulatella niitä lumia, joita myöten Tuohenmaan
taannoiset merkkitapaukset olivat liukuneet. Taavetti tunsi nuortuvansa
tuon vahvaverisen piikansa seurassa.

Maarianpäivän ehtoopuolella sattui niin, että Taavettikin tiesi
tansseista ja kehoitti puolittain leikillään Ainaa jäämään niistä
pois. Aina puolestaan kehoitti Taavettia tulemaan mukaan. Nämä
kehoittelut uudistettiin molemmin puolin pariin kolmeen kertaan,
jotenka keskustelu sai herttaisesti veikailevan sävyn. Kun hetki tuli,
istui Taavetti pirtissä ja Aina teki hiljaisia hankkeitaan. Kumpikaan
ei nyt enää puhunut mitään, oltiin vaiti. Äina katosi, Taavetin oikein
kunnollisesti näkemättä hänen menoaan. Jostakin syystä Taavetti yhä
istui istumistaan samalla paikalla. Maaliskuun hämy vahveni, pitäen
kumminkin kauan kiinni päättyneen aurinkoisen päivän rippeistä.
Taavetti oli tainnut istua tuntikauden sitä katselemassa, kun hänen
silmiinsä tuli naisihmisen hahmo, joka ei voinut olla kukaan muu kuin
Aina. Se palasi kotiin, ei ollut mennytkään tanssiin. Tuohenmaan nuori
isäntä tunsi verensä omituisesti jähmettyvän, ensi kerran eläissään. Ei
otettu enää tulta lamppuun sinä ehtoona...

Aina parka ei ollut pätevä kulkemaan sitä tietä, jolle hän tuona
Maarianpäivän ehtoona ja yönä antautui. Hän ei osannut aavistaa,
että tuo voimakas miehenkarhu, joka tosin tuntui kovin kömpelöltä
näissä asioissa, oli niissä myös yhtä kokematon kuin kehdon
lapsi ja sitä paitsi tietämättään saanut vankan ja kunniallisen,
melkeinpä ylimyksellisen kasvatuksen. Ainasta ei koskaan tullut
Tuohenmaahan emäntää, vaikka hän niiden mielikuvien hehkussa oli
tuona Maarianpäiväiltana palannut iltamamatkansa puolitiestä takaisin
isäntänsä luo ja seuraava yö sitten oli ollut sen tapainen kuin hän oli
kuvitellutkin. Aina katosi Tuohenmaasta kesken vuotta ja Taavetin oltua
jonkun aikaa taas yksinään tuli sijaan Olka, josta sittemmin tuli sekä
emäntä että Taavetin lopullisen kohtalon tekijä.

Olka oli varreltaan ja kasvoiltaan Ainaa komeampi ja käytökseltään
hillitympi. Hän katsoi kyllä alusta aikain isäntäänsä hymyillen,
niinkuin olisi sanonut, että nyt tulin sitten minä tähän, saa nähdä
mitä meistä tulee — niinkuin olisi ensi hetkestä ollut kysymyksessä
jokin voimien mittely. Mutta samalla oli hänen katseensa tiukasti
kiinni talon oloissa ja toimissa eikä hänessä koskaan iltaisin näkynyt
semmoista ilmettä, että nyt ovat talon työt tehdyt ja piika vapaa.

Hyvillä naisen vaistoillaan hän pian älysi, missä mielentilassa
Taavetti oli Ainan jäleltä: juuri siinä tilassa, jossa mies on naiselle
otollisin. Ainan eroominen oli tapahtunut kaikessa hiljaisuudessa
ympäristön siitä paljoakaan tietämättä, mutta entisestä Taavetista
se oli tehnyt toisen miehen. Taavetti ei kaivannut Ainaa, mutta hän
kaipasi sitä, mitä hän lyhyenä hetkenä vaistomaisesti oli tuosta
poistuneesta naisesta etsinyt ja luullut löytävänsä. Tuloksena oli vain
etsinnän kiihtyminen ja se kohdistui nyt Olkaan, jolla ilmeisesti oli
arvokkaampi ja komeampi luonne.

Naapurit eivät taas paljoa tienneet Tuohenmaan oloista noina hiljaisina
kevätiltoina, joina siellä isäntä ja hänen tuleva emäntänsä mittelivät
voimiaan hiljaisissa lemmen kamppailuissa. — Kun ei Tuohenmaasta
kumpainenkaan käynyt missään, niin ei ollut muillakaan sinne asiaa.
Päivä päivältä Taavetti tuli näkemään, kuinka erilainen Olka oli,
ja se riitti hänelle. Hänellä oli suloisesti kiusaava epävarmuus
Olkan suosiosta, mutta hänellä oli yhtä suloinen varmuus siitä,
etteivät Olkan ajatukset enempi kuin askeleetkaan kulkeneet kotoa
minnekään. Että tässä nyt hänen ja Olkan välillä selvästi oli jotakin
tapahtumassa, joka liikkui toisilla tasoilla ja josta Taavetti tunsi,
ettei hän siitä enää tule vapaaksi selkiämään. Hän ja Olka ovat yhtä,
kävi kuinka tahansa.

Olka osasi kerran, kun Taavetti koetti häntä taivutella, sanoa hyvät
sanat:

— Minä olen sen päättänyt, että jos minä saan lapsia yhden tai
useamman, niin ne eivät synny piian lapsina.

Taavetti istui Olkan sängyn laidalla ja piti häntä kädestä. Mutta nuo
sanat kuultuaan hän ikäänkuin havahtui. Vanha yksinkertainen ja tuttu
seikka aukaisi yhtäkkiä tuon vankan miehen oikoiseen mieleen uuden ja
ihmeellisen näköalan: lapset. Olkalla lapsia — se oli kiihdyttävin
kaikista mielikuvista. Kenenkä ne muun voisivat olla kuin minun — ja
niitä on oleva. Mitä olikaan ollut Ainan kanssa? Kaukaista, kaukaista
ja hyvin pientä harhaa.

Olkan suureksi ihmeeksi Taavetti unohti kaikki lähentelynsä, mutta jäi
kumminkin siihen paikoilleen istumaan. Pihalla ja pirtissä oli pehmeä
keväisen iltayön hämy. Vähän päästä sanoi Olka:

— Ja sen myöskin, että minä en ole kihlaamattomana kenenkään morsian.

Näin nuo lauseet putosivat hiljaisella hiukan tylyllä äänellä. Mutta
juuri tuo tyly sävy oli Taavetille kaikkein kiinnittävin. Ja nuo Olkan
yksikantaiset lausahdukset, jotka kuuli vain Taavetti ja äänetön iltayö
— ne eivät suinkaan pysähdyttäneet kehittyvää asiaa, vaan lisäsivät sen
kiihkoa.

Oli sitten kerran myöhemmin taas eräs ilta, paljon valoisampi, mutta
muuten samantapainen. Taavetin oli määrä aamulla varhain lähteä
Tampereelle, ensi kerran Olkan aikana. Ei puhuttu paljoa sinä päivänä,
kumpikin hääri toimissaan entistä vakavampana. Taavetti arveli Olkaa
painavan sen, että joutui oudoksesta olemaan täällä yötä yksinään.
Taavetista itsestäänkin tuntui lähtö omituisen raskaalta.

Ei illallakaan syntynyt isoja puheita. Olka kiirehti aikaisin makuulle
luomatta katsettakaan Taavettiin. Taavetti tunsi kumminkin selvästi,
että Olka odotti häntä luokseen. Tämä oli jännittynyt matkan aatto.

Taavetti antoi hetkien kulua melko myöhäiseen, ennen kuin hän lähestyi.
Näkyi selvästi, ettei Olka ollut aikonutkaan vielä nukkua. Ei ollut
riisunutkaan, vaan makasi liikkumattomana vuoteessaan. Taavetti istahti
tavalliselle paikalleen. Hän hapuili Olkan vasenta kättä ja saatuaan
sen omaansa alkoi sovitella nimettömään pientä tuohisormusta, joka
hänellä oli pivossaan. Se sopi hyvin. Hän veti sen varovasti takaisin,
meni akkunan luo parempaan valoon ja ryhtyi koettelemaan sitä omiin
sormiinsa. Se meni vasemman käden pikkusormeen pysähtyen keskitaipeen
etupuolelle ja oli siihen juuri sopivan kokoinen. Sitten hän jälleen
irroitti sen omastaan ja vei takaisin Olkan sormeen.

— Kelpaako tämä siksi kunnes olen palannut kaupungista — ja onhan se
sopivan kokoinen?

Olka oli täysiverinen naisihminen. Hän, tuo komea ja hiukan
tylyluontoinen palvelustyttö ojensi hämärässä molemmat kätensä
isäntäänsä kohden tavoitellen hänen hartioitaan. Hän teki sen
voimakkaasti ja kiihkeästi omasta aloitteestaan ja täysin tietoisena
siitä mitä teki. Tuohisormus jäi tytön sormeen. Aamulla herättäessä se
oli särkynyt...


3.

Sattui niin, että Taavetti sai tuttua matkaseuraa useita kulmakunnan
äijiä oli samalla kertaa kaupungissa. He saapuivat perille jo kolmen
aikaan päivällä ja kuljeskeltuaan kaupungilla kokoontuivat tiettyyn
yöpaikkaansa, erään kauppiaan majatupaan. Taavetti oli kulkenut
omia teitään onnellisine salaisuuksineen, mielen täytti vahva tunne
siitä, että hänellä kotona on vaimo, nuori, varma ja odottavainen.
Hän kävi kultasepän puodissa ja valitsi sormuksen. Siinä se nyt oli
hänen sormuksensa, jonka Olka oli saava. Siltä särkyi tuohisormus...
Kaiverrusta varten oli tuo ihmeellinen, sileä ja painava kultaesine
kumminkin jätettävä sinne huomisaamuun asti. Silloinhan sopi lähteä
sen saatuaan jouduttamaan sitä siihen yhteen käteen, jonka salaista
odotusta ei kukaan vielä aavistanut. Mitä mahtoi se käsi tällä hetkellä
tehdä? Mitä mahtoi nyt juuri odottaessaan koskettaa?

Taavetin saapuessa majatupaan oli siellä iloinen porina. Siellä oli
myöskin eräs isäntämies keskipitäjältä ja hänen totensa vielä muuan
tamperelainen herrasmies: oli isännän kotoa soitettu ja pyydetty
jonkun asian vuoksi etsimään täältä isäntää. Se oli iloinen veitikka
ja oli heti temmannut äijät vilkkaaseen keskusteluun. Nämä eivät
tienneet, kuka mies olikaan ja pitivät häntä sen vuoksi jonain
kaupunkilaisveijarina. Semmoiset sillä olivat ilveetkin: tahtoi
tahtomalla miehiä henkivakuutukseen selitellen kirjasta taulukoitaan
ja esitellen rahamääriä sinne tänne. Olisi muka sopivaa nyt yksin
tein kaupungissa pistäytyä lääkärissä. Se maksaa vain viisikymmentä
markkaa ja senkin saa takaisin sitten kun ensimäistä vakuutusmaksuansa
maksaa. Äijät vilkuivat toisiaan salaviisaina: kyllä kai me sinulle
rahoja annamme. Mutta hyvin näyt osaavan asiasi; puhu vaan, on hauska
kuullaksemme.

— Mikäs taulukka se tälle sopii, sanoi muuan Taavetin astuessa sisään.

— Sille passaa paraiten naimataulukka — oliskos herran kirjoissa
semmoista.

— Nämä ovat kaikki siihen tarkoitukseen yhtä oivallisia.
Henkivakuutuskirjan perässähän ne tytöt menevät kilvassa. Vieläkös se
isäntä on naimaton?

Siihen tuli muilta jo viisi erilaista nasevaa vastausta, ennen kuin
Taavetti itse kerkisi mitään puhumaan.

— No sitten sopii ottaa vakuutus tulevalle emännälle. Ei mikään ole
sen sopivampi kihlakapine. Kun tytöt saavat sen kuulla, niin kaikki
pyrkivät siihen osallisiksi. Ehkä ruvetaankin puhelemaan.

Taavetti hymyili hiljaista hymyään ja äijät katselivat mielevinä,
että jokohan sai paulaansa. No joutaa joutua, onpahan täysi mies,
sopii katsoa eteensä. Joku sentään koetti antaa Taavetille merkitseviä
silmäyksiä.

— Katsokaas nyt isäntä, jos te näin kaupunkimatkalla pari kertaa
vuodessa maksatte sen ja sen, niin saatte viidenkymmenen viiden
vuoden vanhana niin ja niin paljon melkein kuin ilmaiseksi. Säästätte
kaupunkilystäilystä sen verran.

— Sillä on lystit kotona, ei siltä kaupungissa niihin kulu, sanoi se
äijä, joka koetti Taavettia pelastaa.

— No sitä parempi, silloinhan säästö on kaksinkertainen, sanoi
ahdistaja. Ei se jäänyt sanavelkaa.

Taavetti huomasi äijien ovelan ilmeen ja se tympäisi häntä niin paljon,
että hän alkoi kiinnittää enemmän huomiota vieraan puheisiin. Kirjat ja
kynä olivat jo esillä. Sopihan kuulla sen ehtoja.

Jo meni summa paperiin ja sen jälkeen yhä uusia asioita äijien
osoittaessa kasvavia levottomuuden merkkejä. Noin menee mies huijarien
käsiin ihan joukon keskeltä — kaikkien tuttu se Ollikkakin on,
mutta milläs hän olisi rikastunut, jollei konstilla ja konstien
tuttavuuksilla.

— No kellekäs se sitten kuoleman varalta osoitetaan? Pannaankos se
sille tulevalle emännälle? kysyi vieras.

Se äijä, joka yritti Taavettia suojella, nousi ylös ja sanoi parhaana
sukkeluutenaan:

— Eiköhän panna sitä lapsille?

Toiset hörähtivät nauruun ja yrittivät korjata ehdotusta heikommilla
lisähuomautuksilla.

Taavetti muisti, koska hän viimeksi oli kuullut lapsista puhuttavan.
Hän katsoi vasta nyt vierasta tarkemmin silmiin ja sanoi:

— Pannaan vaan lapsille.

Vieras ei enää puhunut leikkiä. Hän kirjoitteli asiallisesti ja siinä
ohessa neuvoskeli, missä lääkäri asui, koska sinne sopi mennä, ja mitä
maksoi. Sen sopi kyllä maksaa lääkärillekin — kyllä hän soittaa sille
etukäteen.

Asia oli valmis. Vieras nousi ja hyvästeli Ollikan isännän ja
muut miehet ja lähti. Kun jalan ääni vielä kuului, puhkesi joukko
valitteluihin.

— Oli se onni, ettet sille rahojasi lykännyt, mutta kai se juutas
niistä papereistaan kiinni pitää, kun menit ja sörkit niihin nimesi.
Ollikka yritti selittää, ettei se mikään huijari ollut, kansakoulun
opettajahan se oli. Mutta mikä tietää Ollikankaan puheet. Sillä on
ollut täällä talokin — ja olisiko tämä ensimäinen maanmoukka, joka
tässä kylässä pestään. Kesken kaiken Taavetti nousi ja riensi vieraan
jälkeen. Hänen suojelijansa kiiruhti mukaan.

— Älä pelkää, ei se sinua mihinkään maksuihin saa, sehän on mitätön
koko paperi — eihän sinulla vielä lapsia ole. Sitä vartenhan minä juuri
sen mutkan siihen keksinkin, kun-ma näin, että sinä sen vipuun jouduit.

— Odottakaas nyt vähän, minä koetan saada sen kiinni, supahti Taavetti
ja kiiruhti edelleen. Äijä palasi sisälle ja toimitti siellä, että
poika lähti sitä tavoittamaan, mutta kai se jo mennyttä kalua on. Olis
sekin kaunista maksaa tuhat markkaa vuodessa. Mutta ehkä ne lapset ovat
sen pelastus, kun ei niitä ole.

— Niin, ei sunkaan se sille Ainalle —

Taavetti taisi kuulla nämä sanat ovessa tullessaan. Kun toiset
hanakasti utelivat kuinka kävi, sanoi hän purkaneensa koko jutun, mutta
toiset näkivät kyllä hänen päältään, että hän puhui omiaan. Kyllä ne
sellaiset konstinsa pitävät.

Taavetti oli tavoittanut opettajaa vain sanoakseen hänelle, että asia
pitäisi säilyttää salaisena ja että hän kyllä käy täällä maksamassa
maksut, eikä kirkonkylän asiamiehelle, niinkuin opettaja välillä oli
ehdottanut.

Mutta tuon jännittävän näytelmän jälkikajo tuntui koko illan äijien
joukossa. Ollikkakin enää vain nauraa hörötti heidän epäluuloilleen.

Seuraavana aamuna Tuohenmaan Taavetti oli pitkät ajat näkymättömissä.
Äijät arvelivat, että se vieläkin yritti saada kiinni sitä
eilenehtoollista peruuttaakseen tuon epäilyttävän nimikirjoituksensa.
Joku oli nähnyt kadulla Ainankin, jonka nyt tiedettiin olevan jossakin
toimessa täällä kaupungissa. Olipa näkijä häntä puhutellutkin ja
koettanut saada selville sen asioita, mutta mitään valaisevaa ei ollut
tullut ilmi.

Taavetti oli käynyt ensin kultasepällä ja saatuaan sormuksen taskuunsa
lähtenyt lääkärille. Asiamies olikin lupauksensa mukaan sinne soittanut
ja Taavetin mielestä karisivat ne hienon hienot epäilykset, jotka sinne
eilen ehtoolla äijien suurista epäilyksistä olivat tarttuneet. Äijille
hän sanoi kyllä varmuuden vuoksi käyneensä sen lääkärin puheilla,
mutta vakuutti, ettei pappa ollut sinne mitään soittanut, jotenka ei
asiasta siis lopultakaan mitään tullut. Äijien mieleen jäi kumminkin
kytemään epäilys, ettei asia siihen lopu, kun se kerran sai Taavetin
nimikirjoituksen. Kyllä se joku akentti vaan oli. Saadaan nähdä, että
Taavetti vielä joutuu pitemmältäkin siihen yhtiön keskinäisyyteen.

Mutta Taavetti istui riemullisena rattaillaan — ei ollut niitä
miehiäkään, että olisi sormensa polttanut. Ja kun hän viimein oli
päässyt eroon matkaseurastaan, otti hän vielä ennen pihaan tuloaan
sormuksen katseltavakseen. Sitten hän katseli kävelevän hevosen
selkää ja ajatteli lapsiaan. Melkein niinkuin Olkan ohitse hän niitä
ajatteli...


4.

Asia unohtui pian siihen ihmeeseen, että Olka ja Taavetti heti tämän
matkan jälkeen kuulutettiin. Jos nimen kirjoittamisesta oli Taavetille
jotain seurausta, niin suoritti hän ne kaikessa hiljaisuudessa ilman
käräjöimisiä, niin arveltiin.

Taavetti puolestaan teki piakkoin uuden kaupunginmatkan ollakseen varma
siitä, etteivät vakuutuskirjat vaan joutuneet mihinkään välikäsiin.
Sattuikin niin somasti, että hän parahiksi sai ne nyt juuri lunastaa.
Nyt vasta oli asia lopullisesti kunnossa — opettaja vakuutti, että hän
saa kuolla vaikka huomenna; jos joku voidaan todistaa hänen lapsekseen,
niin suoritetaan summa sille. Asian salaisuus oli kumminkin Taavetin
mielestä välttämättömän tärkeä. Hänestä melkein tuntui, että koko
vakuutus menettäisi arvonsa, jos se tulisi tiedoksi. Olka ei missään
tapauksessa saisi sitä tietää. Jos menettäisi tämän salaisuuden, olisi
se melkein samaa, kuin menettäisi itse Olkan. Vielä ulos tultuaan hän
katsoi opettajan seinässä olevaa kilpeä, niinkuin jotain epäluotettavaa
ilmiötä.

Juhannuksena olivat vihkiäiset ja vaikka asia jo kauan oli ollut varma,
merkitsi tuo päivä kumminkin sitä, että Olka nyt vasta oli Tuohenmaan
emäntä — seuraavana päivänä hän kirjoitti muistikirjansa kanteen Olga
Tuohenmaa... Olkan äiti ja veli saapuivat häihin ja viipyivät useita
päiviä. He puhua möhelsivät kovaäänisesti ja sekaantuivat kaikkiin
talon asioihin, jotka tällöin vähänkin esille tulivat. Ilmeni siinä
jokin semmoinenkin kohta, joka vielä sattumalta oli Siina-vainaan
jättämässä kunnossa. Akka korjasi sen nokkelasti siihen tapaan kuin
heillä »ruukattiin». Mitään sanomatta Taavetti tällöin muutti tuon
kohdan entiselleen ja poistui huoneesta. Äänekkäät sukulaiset olivat
oudosti vaiti, pieni supina vain kuului, kun Taavetti meni porstuassa.
Oltuaan neljä päivää he vihdoin lähtivät, sillaikaa kun Taavetti oli
alueensa etäisimmässä ääressä jotain korjaamassa. Mutta illalla oli
Olka hiukan harvapuheinen.

Taavetti oli päättänyt, ettei hän noiden sukulaisten tähden milloinkaan
sano Olkalle mitään. Kun siis taas heinäaikana Taavetti eräänä
iltana pellolta palatessaan näki muorin saapuneen, kätteli hän tätä
hyväntahtoisesti ja kysyi kuulumisia. Meni vielä syötyäänkin jonnekin
kävelylle ja palasi vasta, kun arveli äidin ja tyttären jo menneen
makuulle. Makuulla he olivatkin, muori pakarissa ja Olka valveillaan
omalla sijallaan yhteisessä vuoteessa, vähän samaan tapaan kuin silloin
kihlamatkan aattoiltana.

— Luulin sinun jo menneen Ainasi tykö, sanoi Olka tylysti.

— Kenen?

— Sen, joka oli ennen minua.

— Sekö oli äidilläsi asiana tällä kertaa?

Taavetti katui katkerasti tuota lausetta. Mitä varten hänen tarvitsi
sitä sanoa, kun hän muutenkin pysyi vaiti koko illan? Tämä oli törkein
epäsopu, mitä nuorella parilla vielä oli ollut ja pahinta oli, että
sen kirvoittaminen jäi tällä kertaa. Sen esti Taavetin tekemä viittaus
tuohon kolmanteen henkilöön, joka tänä yönä makasi näiden kattojen alla.

Seuraavina päivinä Taavetti pysyi näkymättömissä niin paljon
kuin mahdollista oli. Kun muorin vihdoin piti lähteä, sanoi Olka
päivällisaikana, että äitiä pitäisi mennä hevosella saattamaan laivalle.

— Sitten on sinun mentävä kyyditsemään. Minun täytyy siinä tapauksessa
kantamalla viedä heiniä latoon; en voi jättää niitä kuivina yöksi
levälleen.

Taavetti ottikin köyden ja lähti heti pellolle. Pitkästä aikaa hän nyt
ensi kerran huomasi olevansa kunnollisesti vihainen. Se ei kohdistunut
kehenkään ihmiseen, mutta hänen mielensä vaan ei ollut tavallisessa
laadussaan. Hän teki työtä karhun voimilla silloin tällöin vilkaisten,
lähtikö talosta ketään.

— Ehkäpä Olka nyt tästä huomaa, että muorin täällä olo tuottaa pelkkää
pahennusta, ajatteli Taavetti. Jossain mielen pohjalla liikkui iltainen
lyhyt sananvaihto. Vaisto taisteli sitä vastaan; hän ei päästänyt
suoraan ajatukseen asti sitä turmiollista nimeä, joka ehtoolla oli
kuulunut Olkan suusta. Eihän hän puolestaan ollut Olkalta kysynyt
entisistä sanaakaan eikä halunnutkaan niistä mitään tietää. Mutta mitä
pitemmälle hän kiihtyi raskaassa työssä, sitä selvemmin hän tajusi,
mikä muori oli: nimetön pahahenki, joka jostain oli tunkeutunut hänen
ja Olkan tielle ikäänkuin nokassaan kantaen tuota tuskallista asiaa.
Mielessä käväisi ilkeästi hänen omankin äitinsä kuva varhaisine
aamulukuineen. Tuntui kuin sekin muisto nyt olisi pyrkinyt tärvelemään
tämän päivän elämää — ikäänkuin vetämään häntä pois Olkasta.

Kun Taavetti illalla tuli sisälle, oli muori poissa, mutta Olka oli
kotona ja hevonen haassa.

— Et sinä mennytkään, sanoi Taavetti.

— En minä ole ennenkään hevosmiehenä ollut, vastasi Olka ja lähti
huoneesta.

Tämä epäsopu haihtui hiljakseen ilman enempää selvittelyä. Kaksi
nuorta ihmistä, jotka rakkaus vasta äskettäin on saattanut päiviksi ja
öiksi toistensa lähettyville, eivät voi kauan vastustaa niitä voimia,
jotka saavat heidät eroamaan isästään ja äidistään. Kesä kului, tuli
alakuloinen syksy. Eräänä syyskuun iltana sai Taavetti Olkaltansa
kuulla asian, joka taas elävämmin toi hänen mieleensä tuon kaupungissa
säilyvän salaisuuden. Vakuutuksen perijä oli olemassa.

Taavetti valvoi kauan ja huomattuaan, että Olka jo nukkui sikeässä
unessa, hän nousi varovasti ylös ja hiipi etsimään vakuutuskirjoja
niiden salaisesta kätköpaikasta. Muistihan hän hyvin maksujen määrän
ja ajat, mutta kumminkin hän nyt raapaisi tulta ja hätäisesti silmäsi
tuota uutuuden kankeata paperia. Niinhän siinä luki: toukokuun ja
marraskuun ensimmäisinä päivinä niin ja niin... hänen lapsilleen.

Taavetti pisti paperin koteloon, kätki sen entiseen paikkaansa ja
palasi sitten hiljaa vuoteellensa. Hän hyväili nukkuvaa vaimoaan
hellästi, niin ettei tämä herännyt, huokasi syvään ja antautui itsekin
unelle.

Mutta juuri unen rajalla hän ilkeästi hätkähti. Ajatus oli jollakin
lailla johtunut siihen, että hän kuolee nyt juuri, painuu yhtä mittaa
tiedottomuuteen, ja että vakuutussumman periminen ei sittenkään ole
järjestyksessä. Voi muka olla joku riitelijäkin — niinkuin muori, tai
ei sittenkään muori, vaan joku — Aina — ja Ainan _lapsi_.

Oliko Ainalla perillinen? Jospa se olisi saanut täältä lähdettyään.
Mitä mahtoikaan muori tietää Ainasta? Aina kuului olevan Tampereella.
Kuinka oli hän, Taavetti, voinut olla niin kokonaan tietämätön
ihmisestä, joka oli ollut täällä ja maannut — tässä samassa vuoteessa.

Taavetti tuijotti vaistomaisesti viereensä, jossa luuli erottavansa
nukkuvan Olkan hahmon, tuon ihmisen, jota hän oli niin halunnut ja joka
äsken oli ilmaissut kantavansa hänelle perillistä. Se oli nyt oma,
mutta näin katsoen ihmeellisen vieras. Hänen oli nyt ajateltava Ainaa
suoraan ja selvästi. Se oli vastenmielistä ajateltavaa, vaikka siinä
väikkyikin jotain hirvittävän viehättävää.

Mies valvoi kauan ja selvitteli sitä yhtä kauhistavaa mahdollisuutta,
että Ainalla voi olla hänen perillisensä, vaikkei hän ole siitä
kuullut. Kuka sitä olisikaan hänelle tullut kertomaan? Olkan äiti
tiesi joka tapauksessa jotain. Huomisesta alkaen hän tiedustelee asiaa
siihen asti, kunnes selvä tulee, mikä sitten tulleekin. Häiriintymätön
mieli näki tuon pitkällisen toimen varmana ja määrätietoisena ja
tyyntyi vähitellen valoisiin kuvitelmiin. Olka heräsi puolivalveille
ja tavoitti raukeasti käsivarttaan miehen kaulalle. Sen hän teki aina
silloinkin, kun illalla oli pienessä epäsovussa nukahdettu...

Taavetti on alkanut silloin tällöin pistäytyä naapureissa, niissä
jotka olivat mukana tuolla keväällisellä kaupunkimatkalla. Hän
istuu iltakauden jutellen ja kuulostellen. Menee monta sellaista
puhdetuokiota niin, ettei mitään erikoista tule mainittua, kunnes
kerran puhe luontevasti ja keveästi osuu siihen Ainaankin, Tuohenmaan
entiseen piikaan. Mitäpäs hänestä muuta, kuin että oli iloluontoinen
heitukka — kyllä-mar Taavetti sen luonnon tuli tuntemaan, hehheh...

— Missähän se nykyään mahtaa olla? kysäisee Taavetti, niinkuin olisi
siinä vaan muuten tullut mieleen sellaista kysyä, noin niinkuin
johtaakseen asian pois omalta kohdaltaan.

— Tampereella on — minä näin sen silloin keväällä, kun Taavettikin sen
yhtiö keskinäisen kanssa veikasteli. Tulikos siitä sen enempää?

— Ei erinomaisia, vastaa Taavetti ja naurahtaa.

Ainasta ei syntynyt sillä kertaa sen pitempiä puheita eikä Taavetti
muinakaan iltoina mitenkään saanut selville Ainan asuntoa eikä
tarkempia vaiheita. Muusta puheen ollen tuli kyllä mainittua, että
poliisikamarista saa tiedon kaupunkilaisten asunnoista. — Jaa, jaa, vai
on siellä niin kaikki tiedossa — tottakai sentään pitääkin...

Marraskuun ensimäisenä päivänä Taavetti laittautui taas kaupunkiin,
mutta mielessä asui nyt muutakin kuin vakuutusyhtiön nimikilpi
opettajan asunnon seinältä. Oli kaukaa järjestettävä niin, että lähtö
tuntui luonnolliselta; oli saatettava teurasvasikka siihen kuntoon,
että Olka alkoi sen kanssa tuskitella ja puolittain äkeänä vaati
lähtemään.

Tuntui tällä kertaa erikoisen huojentavalta, kun koti jäi
näkymättömiin. Nyt en palaa ennenkuin minulla on täysi selko Ainan
asioista, ajatteli Taavetti. Minä menen poliisikamariin jo tänä
ehtoona ja sitten minä urkin sen olikkeet tietooni, vaikka siihen
kuluisi viikko. Häntä melkein nauratti, kun hän katseli hiehon ruhoa
siinä vieressään rattaitten pohjilla. Oli niinkuin olisi pettänyt
sitäkin kunnon elukkaa jo sen eläissä ja vielä nyt lihoina. — Kello on
kaksitoista. Neljältä minä olen kaupungissa.

Jännitys lisääntyi kaupungin lähestyessä nyt enemmän kuin koskaan.
Kun ensimäinen katukivitys alkoi kolista pyörien alla Patterin
ahteessa, tuntui siltä, kuin olisi joku väkevämpi pettänyt häntä
niinkuin hän tuota vasikkaa. Mitäs tämmöisessä pesässä yhden miehen
murheet merkitsevät? Jos täällä oli jollakin naisella lapsi — entä
sitten? Kyllä kai täällä niitä oli satoja semmoisia, mutta Tuohenmaan
Taavetista ei täällä tiedä kukaan. Tietääpä kaksikin — opettaja ja
Aina. Vaikka ne kaksi taas eivät tiedä toisistaan... Kunpa hän olisikin
ollut kahdenkesken hevosensa ja hiehonsa kanssa ja kotona Olka, joka
näin kaukaa ajatellen aina tuntui rakkaimmalta.

Kello oli vasta puoli neljä, kun hän ajoi kauppiaan pihaan. Oli toki
onni, ettei ketään kotikulman miehiä tällä kertaa näkynyt. Ei näkynyt
majatuvassa eikä puodissakaan. Talonmies seisoi portilla leveänä
ja ahavoituneena niinkuin vanha auma. Siltä Taavetti uskalsi kysyä
poliisikamaria. Saatuaan käden liikkeen ja jotakin mörinää neuvoksi,
hän lähti kävelemään, löysi oven ja kiipesi suureen virkahuoneeseen.

Vasta kun hän oli kysellyt Aina Kujansuuta ja selittänyt, koska se
on tänne muuttanut ja mistä, huomasi hän Olkan veljen seisovan saman
pitkän pöydän vieressä vähän etäämpänä. Se oli kuullut hänen kyselynsä
ja katsoi tänne päin suu ilkeässä naurun mareessa. Kun he yhdessä
laskeutuivat alas rappusia sanoi mies olleensa maksamassa sakkojaan
— oli tullut markkinoilla vähän vehkeiltyä. — Mutta älä huoli puhua
Olkalle. Onko sulla asioita sen vanhan piikas kanssa?

— Jäi vähän palkkaa, vastasi Taavetti ja kiirehti eroomaan langostaan.

Taavetti ajatteli: jos minä nyt menen sinne, niin voi Aina olla kotona,
mutta jos menen huomenna aamupäivällä, voi se olla poissa ja minun käy
paremmin. Opettajan luo en kumminkaan mene ennen kuin tämä asia on
selvä.

Tähän ajatukseen hän ehtoolla nukkui majatuvan lavitsalla ja siihen
hän aamulla heräsi. Mutta ennen kuin oli ehtinyt seisaalleen, tuli
niinkuin jonkun sanomana mieleen uusi keino. — Minä koetan hankkia sen
papinkirjan. Siinähän se näkyy, jos sillä jotain on.

Talonmies meni pihassa luutineen ja kihveleineen ja katsoi verestävillä
silmillään tuota maalaista, joka eilen kyseli poliisikamaria ja tänään
papin kansliaa. —

— Mihin tarkoitukseen se tulee? kysyttiin papin kansliassa, kun
Taavetti oli sanonut asiansa.

Taavetti hämmentyi hiukan ja sanoi, että muuten vaan tarvitsisi tietää
sen asiat.

— Ei täällä siitä mitään erityistä näy — naimaton ja lapseton nuori
nainen — ei ole käynyt täällä Herran ehtoollisella...

— Eikö sillä ole ollutkaan lasta?

— Ei ainakaan tänne ole merkitty.

Sepä se; ei ole merkitty, mutta kuka sen silti tietää. Oli — oli
sittenkin käytävä siellä Tammelan perällä. Ehkäpä se nyt ei ole kotona.

Ei ollutkaan — oli tehtaassa. Suuressa yhteiskyökissä näytti luiseva
vaimo erästä ovea, jonka avaimenreikä oli tyhjänä. Taavetti kuuli
äänensä kysyvän:

— Missäs sen lapsi on?

— Herranjesta, pitäskö sillä lapsikin oleman? Etteköös mahda tarkottaa
väärää ihmistä? Tää on se, joka keväällä muutti tänne sieltä ja sieltä.

— Jaaha, ehkä minä sitten olen erehtynyt, sanoi Taavetti ja lähti
kiireemmin kuin oli tullut. Täytyi vähitellen uskoa, ettei Ainalla
mitään ollut. Nyt vasta oli kiire opettajan luo ja sitten lihat
kaupaksi ensimäiselle ostajalle. Kyllä elämä sentään sittenkin on
mennyt parhain päin. Kiireesti vaan kotiin omaan pirttiin, Olkan
askareitten lähettyville. Se on tiukka ja äkeä, mutta osaa olla hyväkin
ajallaan... Ei ole kiirettä Tampereelle, ennen kuin puolen vuoden
perästä, Vapun tienoissa... On se Seetikin aika poika, kun on hankkinut
itselleen markkinasakkoja.

Tuolla kotimatkalla oli Taavetilla kyllä taas tavattoman vahva onnen
kuvitelma, mutta se ei koskaan jaksanut seestyä oikeaksi vankaksi
todellisuudeksi. Tuossa paluussa ja kotiin tulossakin oli jotain
kiusallisen epäsointuista: eihän kotona oleva Olka tiennyt eikä saanut
tietää koko tästä matkasta muuta kuin nuo pienet tuomiset ja sen
vaivaisen hiehon myynnin. Hyväillessään Olkaa Taavetti tunsi tämän yhä
selvemmin; Olka ei enää heltynyt semmoisinakaan hetkinä kuin ennen.
Pitäisikö hänen sanoa kaikki? Ei, ei sittenkään. Minkä Olka kerran on
tulollaan olemasta pois pyyhkinyt, se on oleva poissa, niinkuin on
poissa Olkan oma entisyys, josta hän Taavetti ei tahdo mitään kuulla.

Mutta muori oli jo kesällisellä käynnillään puhaltanut myrkyllisen
henkäyksen, vaikka se sillä kertaa oli niin vähiin haihtunut. Se
käväisi kumminkin silloin tällöin kummankin mielessä ja tuotti
lopullisen turmion keväällä, vähää ennen perillisen syntymistä, kun
Taavetin taas oli käytävä kaupungissa.

Kun Taavetti tällöin ilmaisi matka-aikeensa, rupesi Olka puolestaan
sitä kiihkeästi vastustamaan. Hän puhkesi raivoon, jossa ilmeisesti oli
takana jotain kauan kätkettyä.

Koko talvikauden oli Olka ollut entistään äkäisempi. Taavetti ei ollut
siitä suuria välittänyt, koska arveli sen johtuvan Olkan tilasta — sen
päätyttyähän elämä saisi kokonaan toisen värin ja sisällön. Taavetti
pysyi miehuullisesti syrjässä nyt kun tärkeämmät asiat olivat tekeillä.

Nytkin hän piti Olkan vastustusta vain sellaisena tavallisena ja
teki valmistelujaan. Olkan vihaisuus kumminkin paisui lähtöhetken
lähestyessä yhä uhkaavammaksi, niin että Taavetti jo istahti penkille
miettimään, olisiko sittenkin jätettävä matka. — Ei, kyllä minun
sittenkin on mentävä, päätteli hän itsekseen ja lähti. Porstuasta hän
katsoi pakariin ja näki Olkan selän ja huivilla verhotun pään. Hän
astui yli kynnyksen ja kysäisi:

— Pelkäätkö sinä aikasi tulevan minun poissa ollessani?

— Mene h--tiin votakkasi tykö ja jollet löydä tietä niin kysy
poliisikamarista.

Menetetty — kaikki menetetty. Se oli Tuohenmaan Siina-vainaan ainoan
pojan ajatusten sisältö niinä kuutena päivänä ja yönä, jotka hän tämän
aamun jälkeen vielä eli. Ei hän niitä sanoja ajatellut — hän hoki
hokemistaan jotain muuta vallan outoa sanaa. Ruumiiltaan rauhallisena,
mutta mieli aivan taintuneena hän nousi rattaille kotipihassa ja
ajoi muutaman tunnin päästä tuttuun pihaan kaupungissa. Siellä hän
vasta teki sen vaisun havainnon, ettei hänellä ollut minkäänlaista
päällysvaatetta mukanaan. Tavallisella pikkutakillaan hän oli lähtenyt,
niinkuin oli ollut silloin, kun vieras nainen löi häntä Tuohenmaan
pakarissa. Hän kiiruhti nyt vaan asiamiehen luo lunastamaan kuittinsa.
Silmiä hämärsi ja korvissa kuului kohinaa, kun opettaja kyseli, että
jokos niitä vakuutuksen perijöitä kohtapuoleen alkaa ilmestyä. — Kyllä
toivoa on, vastasi Taavetti ja opettaja lisäsi: — Vaikka Tehän olette
niin riski, että kyllä tulette itse summan nostamaan.

Taavetti osteli jotakin umpimähkään tietämättä ollenkaan, mitä kotona
tarvittiin — tai tarvittiinko mitään. Sitten hän illalla yötä myöten
lähti paluumatkalle. Hän oli täydessä kuumeessa, kun hän pääsi
kotipaikoille. Niinkuin toisen silmillä hän aamuvaloisassa toukokuun
yössä näki, kuinka joku nainen kiiruhti pirtistä prännin puolelle. Se
oli hänen entinen Olkansa.

Olka jäi pienestä prännin akkunasta katselemaan ja huomattuaan
miehen horjuvan ja pitävän jotain ääntä hän päätti Taavetin olevan
juovuksissa, olihan tämä paluuaikakin mahdoton. Taavetin mentyä sisälle
Olka pujahti ulos ja meni Kivistöön, josta oli jo edellisenä iltana
tilannut hevosen mennäkseen kotiin äitinsä ja veljensä luo.

Pirttiin päästyään retkahti Taavetti sänkyyn, jossa ankarat
puistatukset hiukan laantuivat. — Sehän oli Olka, pitää lähteä sen
perässä, ettei se tärvele lasta. Hän nousi ja horjutteli pränniin,
mutta siellä ei ketään ollut Ei ollut ketään. Aurinko paistaa — kuinka
minä täällä olen? Onko kuitti tallella? On kyllä, se on tässä näin, ja
opettaja sanoi silloin, että vain viimeisen tarvitsee säilyttää.

Taavetti ei tiedä päivistä eikä öistä, kun hän horjuu yksin
asumuksessaan. Hän ruokkii karjaa, yrittääpä lypsääkin. Onko äiti
hiljakkoin kuollut, koska minä tämmöisiä hommailen? Missäs se Pallin
Taimi on? Tuossahan on sen äiti.

— Joko meidän Taimikin nyt kelpaisi, kysyi Pallin akka. Taavetti ei
voinut sanoa mikä päivä nyt oli. Hän makasi sängyssään ja käsitti sen
verran, ettei hän vallan hiljan ollut ainakaan navetassa käynyt.

— Juu, antakaa Taimin tulla vaan. Missäs minun lapseni on? Minä
tahtoisin sen tietää.

Hän nousi ja ryhtyi haparoimaan jotain tyynyjen alta. Kuolema soitti
jo hänen tajussaan jotain hyvin etäisen sunnuntaiaamun säveltä.
Pallin akkaa kauhistutti houraileva, kuolemaa tekevä mies, mutta ei
saanut sentään lähdetyksi poiskaan. Sairas hapuili yhä tyynynsä alle,
sai sieltä vihdoin käsiinsä papereita, joita tarkasteli, niin kuin
juopunut. Siinä oli yksi iso ja kolme pienempää paperia. Käytyään ne
vaivalloisesti läpi, hän pusersi ne lujasti kouraansa, oikeni sängylle
ja heitti henkensä.

       *       *       *       *       *

Oli suuri vaiva ennenkuin vakuutuskirja ja kuitit saatiin kiskotuksi
pois ruumiin kädestä, sitten kun sitä pestiin ja arkkuun pantiin. Asia
selvisi: se oli kuin olikin totta silloin vuosi takaperin. Eivät nämä
voi olla mitään humpuukipapereita, täytyy käskeä konstaapeli tänne
katsomaan. Oli sekin nyt ihminen, kun sillä tavalla hyvän miehen jättää
— viimeisillään, toinen niinkuin toinenkin.

Puhuminen ja seikkaperäinen selvittely pääsivät vähitellen alkuun.
Olkalle toimitettiin sana, mutta hän ei voinut saapua edes
hautajaisiin, koska hän juuri oli synnyttänyt ja oli sattuneiden
rasitusten ja järkytysten johdosta kovin heikko.

Myöhemmin hän kyllä sitten saapui yhdessä veljensä kanssa ja lopulta
saapui vielä muorikin. He ottivat asumuksen haltuunsa ja valittelivat
vilpittömästi sattunutta onnettomuutta naapureille, joita siellä kävi
katselemassa lasta ja saamassa tajuunsa pieniä muistivaikutelmia tämän
asumuksen vaiheista niiltä ajoilta, joina vanha Tuohenmaa, Siina ja
heidän poikansa oli sitä hallinnut.




MYLLYNKIVET


Tänä vetisen sameana talvipäivänä ne ilmestyivät taloni seinustalle.
Palasin juuri jostakin — minut oli kävelyllä ollessani poikkeutettu
johonkin mökkiin maistamaan joulusahdin loppua — kun vakinainen
ajomieheni siinä mielevän näköisenä vyyhtesi köyttään. Harmaapäinen
äitinikin siinä seisoi. »Siinä ne sun kaivattus nyt on», sanoi
Heikkinen, ajomieheni. Äiti oli hiukan hentomielinen ja hymisi
itsekseen joitakin muistelmalauseita. »Niin aina, kyllä se vainaakin
niitten vieressä monta yön kulmaa istui.» Hän tarkoitti isävainaatani;
nämä ohuiksi kuluneet kivet olivat lapsuudenkotini lähellä olleesta
jalkamyllystä.

Minä olin jo aikoja unohtanut erään kesäisen toivioretken, jonka
tein noille maille. Satunnainen mielijohde, joka muistutti jotain
salaperäistä enteilyä, saattoi minut silloin tuon kauan sitten
hajonneen kylämyllyn seisontasijoille. Erään tuuhean rantapensaikon
juurelta keksin silloin nuo kivet. Näki että ne olivat siinä maanneet
yli vuosikymmenen ajan. Tuli mieleen hävinnyt, himmeä olento,
jonka mustuneet leukaluut ovat siihen pensaan peittoon unohtuneet.
Silloin löytöretkellä ne nostivat mieleni vireeseen, joka muistutti
poistuvaa ukonilman uhkaa: se ei tullut tänään, mutta on edessä
kumminkin. Koko tuo kävelyretkeni oli vähän samanlaista. En ollut
lähtenyt tuolla tavoin hauskasti ja tukevasti, niinkuin lähdetään
nuorukaisena, mäeltä mäelle, purolta purolle, siintäviä maanääriä,
kimeltävää pienoislainetta ja paimentavaa ruskeasääristä töllintytärtä
katseellaan hakien — jotka lähdöt kyllä nekin tunnen, ah tunnen. Minun
kävelymatkani ovat jo jonkun aikaa olleet turhanaikaisia; vain se, että
olen työtätekemätön herra, antaa niille ulkoa päin katsoen jonkinlaisen
oikeutuksen.

Itseäni pilkaten minä siis palasin toivioretkeltäni takaisin kylän
kautta ja poikkesin jokaiseen neljään jälellä olevaan kantataloon —
kaksi niistä on jo hajonnut palstoiksi. Tapasin isännät toimissaan
maataloustuotannon eri aloilla ja esittelin heille asiaani, koettaen
asenteillani ja lauseparsillani tehostaa herruuttani, rehevää
joutilaisuuttani, siten heikentääkseni tällaisen kuljeskeluni
naurettavuutta. Kun mylly oli ollut kyläkunnan yhteisomaisuutta,
olivat sitä nuo löytämäni kivetkin, ja minun täytyi siis puhutella
jokaista talonumeron haltiaa erikseen. — Niistä tulisi lapsille hyvät
leikkipöydät kesäksi ulkosalle, ja kun ei ole jäänyt mitään muutakaan
muistoa ... »Muistoa» oli äitelä sana, mutta se hellytti varmasti
mielet. — Mitäs siinä, vie pois vaan minun puolestani. Ja kun sitten
nähtiin ikkunasta minun menevän, vaihdettiin emännän kanssa pari
tilaisuuteen sopivaa sanaa.

Se oli se kesäinen retki. Samassa luonnottomassa toiminnan hehkussa
kävelin vielä ajomiehen asunnolle ja pyysin hänet siirtämään kivet
meille. Hän lupasi tehdä sen joskus sopivan hetken tullen, ja minä
palasin kamariini mielessäni tympäisevä tyydytys tuon tärkeän tehtävän
ripeästä ja huolellisesta suorituksesta.

Eteenpäin kahlatessani asia unohtui, painui umpeen niinkuin muukin
jälkeni, kunnes nuo latteiksi kuluneet pyöreät kivet nyt ilmestyivät
tuohon seinustalle. Ne ovat nyt siinä niinkuin kaksi kovan leivän
vertauskuvaa. Mitä varten minä niitä tänne laahautin? Epäonnistunut
teko, joka ei sovi tälle tasolle. Vaistomainen yritys saavuttaa seuraus
ennen syytä ja saada sillä tavoin syykin syntymään — jälkeen päin.

       *       *       *       *       *

Siinä ne nyt kumminkin ovat mieltäni painamassa, ja minun on kai
vapautuakseni turvauduttava hamasta aikojen hämäristä tiettyyn keinoon:
saneltava synty syitä myöten: omistettava hetkinen vanhan myllyn
muistelemiseen. Se hetki kuluu kuitenkin muutenkin eikä enää palaa —
tämä iltapuoli 15 päivänä tammikuuta 1923. Ehkä mylly on unohdettu
vainaja, joka kaipaa jälkimainintaansa.

Muuttukoon siis harmaa viheriäksi ja pilvinen himmeys parhaaksi
poutasääksi. Pienen pojan jokainen askel on iloinen tapaus hänen
orastavassa elämässään, kun aurinko lämmittää hänen hentoa niskaansa
ja kuiva neulanen virkeästi pistää hänen paljasta jalkaansa. Hän
hyräilee ja harppailee, seisahtaa ja kuuntelee. Kunnes silmään osuu
mansikka, kypsä mehevä ja yksinäinen, niinkuin olisi se siinä varkain
tarkkaillut toisen yksinäisyydenilmettä. Poika huomaa sen ja koska
se on yksinäinen marja, ei hänelle tule mitään ahmatin halua. Hän
kumartuu tutkimaan marjaa, ennen kuin hän sen poimii; toteaa kuinka
marja on kiinni kannassaan, tarkastelee lehtien ylä- ja alapintoja ja
repii esiin rönsyt. Tuntuu melkein turhanaikaiselta syödä tätä marjaa.
Kyykkysillään viipyen hän litistelee sitä kauan suussaan ja viimein
sen nieltyään jää siihen asentoonsa mitään ajattelematta tuijottamaan
tyhjää valkoista marjan sijaa. Hän viipyy siinä kauan ja kun hän
vihdoin nousee seisaalleen, humahtaa korviin myllyn kohina niinkuin nyt
vasta alkanut uusi ihme.

Poika näkee siihen missä seisoo myllyn katon ja matalan savupiipun.
Näkee hän kyllä kaiken muunkin, oven ja portaan, vintan ja
putkiruuhen, mutta viehättävintä on se, kun näkee koko katon päältä
päin ja mustuneen savupiipun suun. Hän ei ole vielä koskaan käynyt
minkään rakennuksen katolla; kotona ei ole päästetty ja kylässä
ei ole uskaltanut. Mutta tästä näkee jokseenkin selvästi kaiken
sen salaperäisen, mikä katon päällystään sisältyy. Mylly on siinä
katseltavana niinkuin joku kiltti, vaaraton rumilas. Verrattoman
etäisyyden takana on se aika, jolloin mylly kävi ja oli silloin
ikäänkuin vihaisempi lähentelevälle pikkupojalle. Se oli siihen aikaan
kun maa alkoi vihoittaa ja metsä miestää.

Nyt poika tietää, että hän voi mielin määrin lähestyä myllyä miltä
puolen tahansa. Hän laskeutuu pitkin kuivaa rinnettä myllyn eteen,
jossa saveen kuivuneet syvät rattaan jäljet kertovat, kuinka kuormia
on käännetty. Siihen on silloin varissut viljaa kaikenlaista, se on
siinä itänyt ja rehoittaa nyt pitkällä oraalla. Myös myllyyn johtavan
sillan kansien raoissa kasvaa kauraa ja ruista. Ne ovat arvokkaita
leikkiviljelyksiä; niitä pitää käydä katsomassa ja tulla leikkaamaan
sitten kun ne tuleentuvat...

Sata suurta ja tuhat pientä lorinaa ja lirinää soittaa katkeamatonta
yhteissoittoaan — yhäti, yhäti vaan, vaikka kuinka kauan tässä
viipyisit. Kierrät hiukan myllyä, sieltä aukenee uusia tirinöitä ja
lorinoita. Seinän alitse valuu vahvempi ja tummempi vesi salaperäisistä
alushämäristä. Myllyn takana — sinne ei koskaan kenelläkään ole asiaa.
Ei osaa kuvitellakaan, että sitä seinää sieltä olisi joku joskus
ollut rakentamassa. Siellä kasvaa tuonta ja korpileppää ja niiden
haarat ja oksat ovat täynnä villin humalan köynnöksiä. Siellä juoksee
lukemattomia haarapuroja, vuoroin näkyvissä, vuoroin sakean ryteikön
alle solahtaen. Siinä oli kala, kahden tuuman mittainen hauki. Poika on
ollut siinä kyykyllään suvannon päällä ja katsoo taas ylös, niinkuin
äsken tuolla rinteellä. Miellyttävä alakuloisuus käväisee hänen
tajunnassaan. Hän toteaa ajan kuluneen.

Rämmittyään aikansa ryteikössä, harppailtuaan yli sivupurojen aina
sinne asti, missä äärimmäinen sivupuro pyöristyy naapuritöllin
pellava-lioksi, poika palaa saman vaivalloisen tien takaisin. Jossain
kohdassa hän rähmällään maaten tavoittaa puolikypsää viinimarjaa niin
syvältä, että silmät pullistuvat ja nysäinen oksan väkkärä painaa
ilkeästi kaulaa. Kuivaa mustaa rehua on tarttunut paidan hihoihin ja
hiuksiin. Mutta täältä jälleen palatessa myllyä kohden tulee nähneeksi
etäämpää ja kokonaisena myllyn harvinaisen takaseinän räystäitä myöten.
Aurinko paistaa siihen kauttaaltaan. Lähemmäksi tullen näkyy suuri
sisilisko alimmalla hirrellä. Äänen kuulumatta se luiskahtaa siitä
nokkospehkon suojaan, eikä osaa kuvitella, että sitä sen jälkeen enää
olisi missään. Paitsi nokkosia kasvaa siinä myös joitain korkeita
yrttejä, joiden pienikukkaiset tertut ovat saman värisiä kuin lehdetkin
ja joiden nimestä ei tiedä.

Aurinko alkaa niinkuin hiukan väsähtää; kulunutta aikaa on ikäänkuin
karttunut kassaan, on jo varaa vaimentaa paisteen räkitystä. Tullen
myllyn takaa jälleen siihen sivuseinälle, jossa musta vesi seinän
alitse virtaa, seisahtuu poika katselemaan alajuoksuun päin, missä
kaltaiset pensastuneet rantaniityt jyrkästi alas viertäen kuvastelevat
polveilevan joen oikkuja. Jossain siellä on viikate äskettäin katkonut
tutun karhunputkiryhmän, sängessä näkyvät suuret rengasmaiset
leikkauspinnat. Poika tietää paikan tänne asti, voisi mennä suoraa
päätä sinne, jos tahtoisi.

Tietojensa ja tuntojensa viehättämänä hän käärii housunsa polven
yläpuolelle ja laskee tunnustellen jalkansa vilistävään veteen. Virran
paine tuntuu hauskasti sääristerissä, se voisi melkein kaataakin ja
saisi se vaikka sen tehdäkin, silloin olisi ollut vaarassa... siinä
on muutenkin vahva vaaran kuvitelma, kun hän seinän alitse tunkeutuu
myllyn alle ikuiseen pimeyteen, jossa kihinä ja kohina on läheisempää
ja ikäänkuin puhuvampaa. Vilisevä vesi heijastaa hiukan valoa, niin
että poika orpanaportaalla seisten erottaa akselin, tukin ja siivet ja
niiden takaa putkiruuhen pään. Hän hiipii orpanaporrasta myöden sinne
viereen ja käy rohkeasti kiinni siipeen. Se ei hievahdakaan... Hän
kuuntelee. Yhtäkkiä alkaa kammoittaa olo tässä raskaassa, kosteutta
tuoksuvassa pimeydessä, jatkuva kohina on niinkuin jotain liikettä,
niinkuin olisi mylly jo hetken ollut painumassa hänen päällensä.
Jos nyt tuolla ulkona alkaisi maailman loppu... ehkä on siellä jo
pimentynyt, salamat leimahtelevat ja Jumalan poika näkyy taivaalla.
Ehkä ovat isä ja äiti jo menehtyneet. Onko täällä parempi kuin ulkona?
Ei, ylhäällä myllyssä on parasta. Mutta luukku on kiinni. Innosta
vapisten poika nousee kiivinpuuta myöden ylös ja saa kuin saakin
heikoilla ranteillaan nostetuksi luukun auki ja vaaran päätä huimatessa
punnerretuksi itsensä reunan yli myllyn puolelle.

Siellä vallitsee unelias suvisydämen rauha, jota ei ole häiritty
kolmeen kuukauteen. Neliruutuinen ikkuna on ylt'yleensä jauhon tomun ja
hämähäkin seittien peitossa, eikä hiljaisuus tiedä mitään maailmanlopun
tulosta, joka äsken heijasteli pojan hennossa hermostossa. Pojalla ei
ole ainoatakaan satukirjaa, hän on lukenut vain aapisensa ja Tuhkasen
lukukirjan. Mutta tämä suvinen myllyn sisus, jonne hän sattumalta
näin on joutunut, se on hänelle voimakas satu. Tuossa ovat kivet,
joissa tuntuu säilyvän sen hetken sävy, jona ne keväällä viimeisen
kerran vongahtivat. Tuossa on pesä, jonka hiilustassa myllymiehet
paistoivat ohrapannukakkuja, tuossa tori ja tratti karistimineen,
kaikki taintuneena kohisevaan hiljaisuuteen ja kosteaan kuohun ja
jauhon lemuun. Poika hetvahtaa taas ajatuksettomaan tuijotukseen,
silmät laajenevat ja hän antaa armaitten hetkiensä mennä. On vielä
aikaa iltaan, vielä ehtii retkeillä Myllyniityn pensaikoissa tutkimassa
orjantappurain omituista hedelmänmuodostusta, istuskella ladonovella ja
saapua sen kautta riihen eteen, jonne myllyn vaikutus ei enää tunnu.

Tämä on täysipainoista satua. Kun poika mieheksi varttuneena ja
hirvittävän kauas näistä ajoista etääntyneenä lukee Romain Rolland'n
Jean-Christophe'ia, sijoittaa hän mielikuvituksessaan Christophe'in
syntymähuoneen tähän myllyyn...

Tulee siitäkin kesästä syksy ja vesisateet, jotka paisuttavat jokea.
Mylly käy, sen kuulee kotiin asti. Veden kohina syvenee ja etääntyy,
kun vintta avataan ja kaikki vesi kiitää esteettömästi myllyn alle
siipien kitaan. Se on nyt asiallinen vaarantakaisen kyläkunnan
jauhatusmylly, ei enää satu. Kasvanut poika lähestyy sitä toisin
tuntein. Hän tuntee myllymiehen, rivosuisen rengin. Rengin aika tulee
myllyssä pitkäksi ja sen vuoksi hän kiusaamatta sallii pojankin
siellä olla. Hän antautuu lapsen kanssa jonkinlaiseen äitelään
tasavertaisuuteenkin, laulelee sille pitkiä monivärsyisiä tyttölauluja,
joiden kansanomainen suorasukaisuus on hirvittävä, mutta sillä kertaa
kovin viehättävä. Kun poika taas kypsyneenä miehenä on ongella ja
syvään luonnonhartauteen vaipuneena, tulee kutsumatta se sävel, vieläpä
sanatkin hänen huulilleen ja — mikä ihmeellisintä — aiheuttamatta
sielussa lievintäkään kauneuden himmennystä...

Talvella mylly uupuu syvälle kinosten ja jääriitteen alle. Sinne ei
mene tietä eikä polkua. Jonain virkeänä talviaamuna lähtee poika
suksineen noudattamaan kissan jälkiä. Omia ohjeitaan seuraten ne
lopulta päätyvät myllyn henkeen, yhtyen siellä hiirten, lintujen
ja saukon jälkiin. Poika seisoo siinä hetkisen suksillaan vilun
sinertäessä kaulaa ja ranteita ja silmäin tuijottaessa myllyä, joka
nyt on yhtä yksinäinen kuin suvisydännä, mutta ikäänkuin heikompi ja
nöyrempi kuin silloin.

Kunnes taas kevät tulee ja joki tulvii vieden mukanaan puisen
sillan ja vyöryen kellanruskeana kuohuna myilyalueen kolukistoissa.
Soveliaassa suvantopaikassa pyörii pyörimistään korkea ja säännöllinen
vaahtotötterö. Lehti on puhkeamaisillaan ja myöhäisenä vaaleana
kevätiltana hiipii kyläntyttö tutun yöjauhattajan vieraaksi. Poika
kuulee sen sänkyyn äidiltään, kun tämä ennen makuulletuloaan vielä
silmää ikkunasta ulos ja siinä puhelee isälle. Poikakin on jo vuotta
vanhempi kuin viime kevännä... Hän on saanut »Maamme kirjan», sen kuvat
ja lukukappaleet ovat antaneet vauhtia mielikuvitukselle, niinkuin
auringonlämpö lehden puhkeamiselle. Juuri tänään hän myllyn luona
pienistä kivistä rakensi samanlaisen yliopiston kuin on kuvattu sen
kirjan loppupuolessa. Ja komea kaarnalaiva saapui ulkomailta satamaan
siihen lähelle...

Kosken kevätöinen kohina kuuluu nyt pirttiin asti tuudittaen uneen
viatonta ruumista ja sielua.

Niin on ollut kerran maailmassa ja nyt on edempänä mainittu samea ja
matala talvipäivä. Minusta on omituisen luonnotonta ajatella, että tuo
hiukan kuluneen näköinen ja hiukan parroittunut miehen pää, jonka kuvan
näen tähän peilistä, on eläen muodostunut siitä silloisen poikasen
päästä. Siinä on jotakin melkein häpeällistä.

Ja ulkona seinustalla ovat kaikkien katseltavina tylsännäköiset
kivikakut — muistoina mukamas.




TALVINEN TURTUMUS

Keskenjääneitä joulukertomuksia.


Ehkä kaikki johtuu siitä, etten ole täysin terve — tai ehkä
kivulloisuuteni johtuu tuosta kaikesta. Tai ehkä nuo kaksi seikkaa
tukevat toisiaan, kiertyvät turmiolliseksi ympyräksi, josta ei ole
ulospääsyä. Ehkä juuri sen ympyrän kiertäminen minua pyörryttääkin. En
tiedä, mutta jokin minua turruttaa tämän puolialastoman talven päivinä.
Sellaista se oli jo kesäkin, tuo ikävä, sateinen ajanjakso, joka näin
jälestäkin ajatellen tuntuu olleen vain sitä varten, että tämä nykyinen
tilani olisi sitä peruuttamattomampi. Nyt olen ja hengitän talven
synkimmässä sydämessä. Näihin aikoihin pitäisi pimeyden seisahtua,
suuren näkymättömän vauhtipyörän hievahtaa, liikahtaa toisaalle päin
ehtiäkseen kevenevien viikkojen kuluessa yhä villimpään vauhtiin
kevättä kohden. Niin pitäisi, mutta minä en saa toivon lauseeseen
oikeata rytmiä, koska sanelen sen pingoittuneesta ajatuksestani, en
sieluni vapaudesta.

Olen sairas vaikka yritänkin järkeillä, että se on jotain semmoista
turhanaikaista, hypokondriaa, samaa jota sairastin kahdenkymmenen
iällä, silloin laihana ja kalpeana, nyt päinvastaisin ominaisuuksin.
»Tee työtä, se on paras lääke. Kirjoita vaikka joulukertomus, jota
sinulta on pyydetty.» — Niinpä pitäisi. Jospa yritänkin.

Minä alan kirjoittaa enkelistä, joka saapuu tarkastamaan maan
lasten joulua. Kuvaan ensin taivaan, josta enkeli lähtee. Esittelen
orjantappuraseppeleen, kuvaan sikäläisiä jouluvalmistuksia, ja viimeksi
enkelien lähtöä tarkastusretkilleen. Taivaan Isä antaa katseensa
säteillä avaruuteen, ja jokaisella säteellä kiitää enkeli kukin omaa
nimikkokappalettaan kohden. Matkalla he kohtaavat loppumattoman määrän
laajenevia pallonpintoja. Ne ovat muodostuneet niistä ensimmäisistä
säteistä, jotka kaikkeuden eri aurinkojen syttymishetkinä ovat niissä
ensimmäisinä avaruuteen kimmonneet ja vielä ovat matkalla. Enkeleillä
on kyky nähdä nuo säteenpäistä muodostuneet pallot erillisinä, vaikka
ne kaikkialla tunkeutuvat toistensa aloihin... Siinä Maankin enkeli
kiitää omalla säteellään. Hän on enkelikunnan vähäisimpiä, toverit
pyrkivät vähin hymyilemään hänelle. On pientä taivaallista leikinlaskua
siinäkin, että Maa on annettu hänen nimikokseen. Jos Maan lapset itse
ovat kärkkäitä kuvittelemaan olevansa erikoisasemassa, niin kyllä he
sitä ovatkin ainakin taivaan väen tietoisuudessa. Taivaan poika tuli
kerran Maan pinnalle ja opetti täkäläisille erinomaisen yksinkertaisin
sanoin ja teoin, kuinka heidän piti olla ja elää. Siinä kävi niinkuin
tiedetään, mutta paras tuli sittenkin viimeksi: tänne muodostui
kristillinen kirkko, jonka teot ja harrastukset myös ovat tunnetut
moninaisuudessaan. Inkvisitsiooni, hartaat esirukoukset myrkkykaasujen,
yöllisten zeppelinihyökkäysten ja nälkäsaarron puolesta — siinä pari
havaintopistettä sen kehityksen tieltä. Eipä ihme, että Maan lapset
ovat herättäneet taivaan väessä mielenkiintoa, joka on huumorin
värittämä...

Tähän asti kirjoitan kertomusta helposti ja kevyesti. Näen valtavina
perspektiiveinä kaikkeuden näköalat, näen ne jotenkin asiallisesti,
ilman innoituksen hehkua. Olen kiitävinäni enkelin mukana paisuvien
pallojen huminassa... Mutta — kun Maata lähestytään, putoan minä
äkisti pois, putoan vielä nopeammin kuin kiitävä säde. Olen Maan
päällä pikemmin kuin enkeli, istun tässä autiossa puolivalmiissa
huoneessani koneeni vieressä lukien sen takaa rivejä, jotka nyt
tuntuvat tylsiltä, ja _odotellen_ sitä ilkeätä tunnetta, joka taas
pian on leviävä ruumiiseeni, tuo tumma tunne elämän lakkaamisesta
ilman kipua... Pitäisi nyt tehdä enkelille matkasuunnitelma, kaavailla
eri inhimillisiä tyyppejä, joiden olkapään taakse enkeli pysähtyy
tarkkaamaan heidän joulumietteitään. Pitäisi siinä olla hallitusmies,
sotaherra, kirkkoherra, disponentti, lihavahko talollinen; sitten vielä
tiedemies, taiteilija ja kirjailija mieluimmin yhteen kokoontuneina, ja
lopuksi pienen lapsen kuolinvuode köyhän leskivaimon himmeässä loukossa.

Mutta kun kuvittelen lähteväni seuraamaan enkeliä pitkin tuota
ihmisriviä, niin panee luontoni jyrkästi vastaan. Sellaisessa
kuvitelmassa on jotakin luonnotonta: niinkuin veisin enkelin
tuonne mökkiin nurkkatanssiin, esittelisin hänelle pari kolme
reimakasta sälliä ja sanoisin; »Neiti on hyvä ja huvittelee» Ei
sopisi häntä viedä lesken himmeään loukkoonkaan. Siellä on jo
enkeli. Jokaisella lapsellahan on oma enkelinsä, joka rukoilee hänen
puolestaan »sanomattomilla huokauksilla». Ei sovi, ei sovi koko tämä
suunnitelma... Niin kulkee harhaan runoilijan innoitus. Se hajoo
samealle taivaalle ja pitkään hevosjonoon, jonka näen jäällä matavan
alas päin etäistä rautatietä kohden; sekalaisia hevosia ja miehiä,
jotka hinaavat tehtaan paperia maailman markkinoille.

Ei ole enää enkeliä missään. Mihin ne muuten ovat yleensäkin joutuneet?
Nehän ovat kristillisessä uskonrakennelmassa sangen tärkeitä tekijöitä,
mutta minusta tuntuu, että nykyinen aika on ne tuiki unohtanut. Ovatko
Jumalan valtakunnan maalliset järjestelijät kaikessa hiljaisuudessa
panneet heidät viralta, vai eikö niillä muuten ole soveliasta
käytäntöä heidän hommissaan? Ehkä heitä kammottaa vetää enkeleitä
myrkkykaasuihin. Tuntuu kuin olisivat enkelit jonkinlaista vanhaa
romanttista dekoratsioonia siinä kristillisessä uskonrakennelmassa,
jota aikamme politikoivat kirkonmiehet soveltelevat järeään veriseen
asiallisuuteen. Ei ehditä nyt keskustella enkeleistä, ja huono taitaa
olla heitä muistaakaan, kirkon miehenkään, esimerkiksi silloin, kun hän
harkitsee kysymystä, onko sotilaitten suoritettava vankien teloitukset
vai olisiko perustettava erityinen pyövelinvirka.

Kun mieheltä näin hajoo teelmä käsistä, niin hän tuskastuu ja karkaa
sinne tänne niinkuin hyönteinen, joka on pudotettu kuumaan tuhkaan.
Sameat joulukuun pilvet hyörivät taivaallaan tämän viheliäisen pienen
maapallon ilmassa, jota ei voi tuulettaa ulkoa päin; jonka on itse
nieltävä omat katkunsa.

Mutta joulukertomus? Tuskastunein aivoin alotan toisen.

       *       *       *       *       *

Yritän nyt kertoa tiedossani olevasta torpan väestä, joilta poliisi
äskettäin hävitti valmiit jouluviinat ja keittovehkeet. Tai eihän
se enää torppa ole vaan talo, lain mukaan itsenäiseksi lunastettu,
ja muuten oiva esimerkki siitä, kuinka kohottavasti itsenäistyminen
yleensä on vaikuttanut noihin entisiin yhteiskunnan surunlapsiin.
Ne vakiintuneet tyypit, jotka realistis-naturalistinen kirjallisuus
luuli luoneensa mökkiläisistä ja torppareista, ne ovat nyt puhdasta
romantiikkaa. Näillä nykyisillä »uutistalollisilla» on eri otteet
kuin oli Aho-vainajan näkemillä. Jos on olemassa oikeata luontaista
veressä asuvaa porvarillisuutta, niin kyllä nämä sitä sitten
edustavat. Tuon itsetietoisen viekkaan naaman takana työskentelevät
aivot, jotka harkitsevat, että ehkä vielä sentään on parasta olla
porvaria äänestämättä, niillä on sentään vielä juonensa, vanhoilla
kantatalollisilla, ei niitten kelkkaan ole menemistä... Varakas hän
kyllä on, töllin lunastushinta on parissa vuodessa maksettu. Hän on
ahkera ja tarmokas, hän ponnistaa usein yli voimainsa. Mutta noilla
ominaisuuksilla on hänessä tuiki toinen väri kuin se, jonka romanttinen
kansankuvaus on niille antanut ja lukijainsa mieliin syövyttänyt.
Ahkeruus ja toimeliaisuus, sehän maistuu pyhäkoululta niinkuin sekin,
että miksei noiden muuten niin sievien mökkien ympärillä koskaan näe
puutarhaa eikä koristekasveja. No, onhan tuolla vanhalla mummolla,
joka saa vaivaisapua... Mutta kun on äijä ja ämmä ja seitsemän lasta,
joista vanhin kolmannellatoista, ja vielä kolme lehmää, vasikka, viisi
lammasta ja hevonen, niin siinä kirotaan haikeasti, kun nostetaan
tukin tyveä reelle ja jos hevonen tällöin hievahtaa ennen aikojaan,
niin raivostunut, vihasta vapiseva mies kurittaa sitä ankarasti. Tämä
mies yrittää sen minkä ikinä ovat ylistetyt esi-isät yrittäneet,
mutta hänellä ei ole varaa olla sankarillinen missään suhteessa.
Hänen rehellisyytensä on erinomaisen joustavaa eikä hän edellytä sitä
kenessäkään olevan yli käytännöllisen tarpeen. Kateus on hänessä
oleellista; jos joku toinen ansaitsee ja hyötyy, niin hän tietää,
että ainakin se hyöty jäi hänelle tulematta. Jos hän osaisi tulkita
tiedottoman onnenunelmansa, niin luulisin sen olevan sellaisen, että
hänellä olisi kolmeksikymmeneksi vuodeksi tiedossa satumaisen edullisia
urakoita, joista hän hevosineen kahdentoista tunnin työpäiviltä saisi
kaksisataa markkaa. Vaikkei hän niitä ehtisi tehdäkään, kunhan ne vaan
olisivat hänelle varattuja...

Hän ajaa päivän lantaa ja yön hän istuu viinankeittonsa vieressä.
Ämmän on määrä pitää silmällä ympäristöä. Nuorin lapsi parkuu, vanhin
on herätettävä sitä katsomaan sillaikaa kun äiti liikkuu ulkosalla
vaanimassa. Nuorimman edellinenkin tarvitsisi vielä apua, sillä on
riisin puremat jalat ja se tahrii sijansa, kun ei vanhin puoliunissaan
ymmärrä auttaa sitä tilalle ja paikalle.

Vaikka näin kireälle puserretaan, tulevat sittenkin poliisit niinkuin
jonkun tilauksesta ja hävittävät koko keitoksen. Vaimo on juuri
siivoomassa nuorimman edellistä, kun mies raivostuneena tulee sisälle
ja pudotettuaan kaapissa olevat viinapullot taikinatiinuun, kääntyy
nyrkki pystyssä sanattomana sähisten vaimon kimppuun. Poliisi avaa oven
ja huutaa: — So-so, mies, annahan akkasi olla.

Kiukusta itkien mies sadattelee:

— Kyllä kai herrat juovat apteekin aineita, mutta köyhälle ei
annettaisi rojuakaan.

Mutta tämä sadattelu on kaikin puolin väärä, sillä mies ei ole köyhä
eikä hän keitä rojua itselleen, vaan isännälle, joka kapinakevännä
vapautti hänet vankilasta juuri kun piti ammuttaman. Se kapinajuttu oli
suurin harhaveto, minkä tämä mies on tehnyt. Kun hän yökaudet mietti,
pitikö yhtyä ja tuli saaliin toivossa yhtyneeksi juuri vähää ennen kuin
punaisten häviö tuli ilmeiseksi. Sillaikaa meni hyvä maanvetourakka
toiselle ja isäntä, se punanaamainen möhömaha, pääsi irvistävälle
puolelle. Isäntä ja torppari, nuo kaksi ovelaa juonittelijaa ja
toistensa tarkkailijaa ovat sen jälkeen olleet paljonkin yhteisissä
asioissa. Torppari on itsenäistynyt ja kiinteällä vimmalla yrittänyt
korjata silloisen huonon urakan jälkiä. Viina-asioissa on ollut
semmoinen sopimus, että isäntä antaa aineet ja maksaa määrätyn
keittäjäisen. Sakot maksetaan niin, että isäntä maksaa kaksi
kolmannesta ja hän itse loput.

Niin kävi nyt tällä kertaa, juuri joulun alla. Ne pullot, jotka
säästyivät taikinan alla, myi mies sentään muualle, siten ansaiten oman
sakko-osuutensa. Isännälle hän sanoi kaiken menneen maahan ja niskasta
puristaen vannotti akan ja mukulat pitämään suunsa kiinni.

Minun piti nyt kuvailla jouluiltaa tuossa tyypillisessä suomalaisessa
maalaisperheessä. Uskallan sanoa sitä tyypilliseksi, koska tunnen
kansalaisen! Ne ominaisuudet, jotka esiintyvät Kirrenmaan Vihtorissa
ja Alviinassa — olkoon nyt sanottu heidän nimensäkin — eivät ole
mitään poikkeustapauksia. Että kaikki eivät _tee_ niinkuin he, se
on vanhaa tuttua saamattomuutta ja arkuutta. Näillä on tallella
esi-isäin ankara ponnistusvoima, jolla tänne, lumen ja jään keskelle,
on luotu varakkaitakin sukuja. Ja on siinä Vihtorilla ja Alviinallakin
ponnistamista ennenkuin heidän seitsemän lastansa — ja niitä voi vielä
tulla — perivät edes kohtuullisen alkupääoman.

Ei Kirrenmaan väki ole mitään erikoisväkeä, minä tunnen sen hyvin.
Ei heistä saa mitään tunnelmapitoista jouluyön kuvausta. Jouluyö on
heille jotakin varsin epäoleellista, tai ei nyt juuri yö, mutta pitkät
pyhät, joina ei voi ansaita. Vasta Tapanina voi mennä tiedustelemaan,
ostaisiko tehtaan pomo ne arvopuut, jotka tulivat torpan mukana.

Minä tunnen Kirrenmaan noita arvopuita myöten; hän on niiden tähden
papereinensa käynyt minun luonani useamman kuin yhden kerran. Hän
osti torppansa heti alkupäässä, jolloin arvopuiden rajamittana oli 15
senttiä rinnan korkeudelta. Sitten laki muuttui niin, että mitaksi
tulikin 20 senttiä. Kun kauppakirjassa puhuttiin vain arvopuista,
niin huomasi Kirrenmaa juonen: että hänkin saisi lunastushintaan puut
siihen mittaan asti ja vain sitä suuremmista maksaisi erikseen...
Siinä hän istui niinkuin jonkun virkaherran kansliassa, vaikka hän on
nähnyt minut lapsena paitasillani leivän pala kourassa. Hänellä on
hyvät parkkumivaatteet ja uudet tallukkaat. Hän on lämpöisen ja tukevan
näköinen, leikkaamaton kaulaparta ulottuu korvan juuresta toiseen
yhtyen hiestyneisiin hiuksiin. Hän on vielä nuorehko mies, mutta hän
on kumminkin täysi äijä, töllin äijä. Sellainen kaulaparta lämmittää
erinomaisesti eikä sänki syö huivia. Noista seikoista ikäänkuin uhoo
se tosiasia, että Kirrenmaa oli hyvä asumus jo silloin, kun hän pääsi
siihen vävyksi.

Keskustelun kuluessa sanon sivumennen jonkun lauseen, josta hienon
hienosti ilmenee, että kaikki ne näkökohdat, jotka hänelle elämisessä
ovat yhtä tärkeitä kuin leipä, silakka ja perunat, ovat minulle
käsittämättömiä; että halveksin niitä. Hän on ovelasti vaiti, on
niinkuin hauskasti kieroilisimme toinen toisellemme. Kyllähän hän
tietää, että minulla on omat juoneni, joilla minä rahaa keplottelen.
Teen jonkun sadun, semmoisen tarinan vaikka Haaki-Kustaasta tai vaikka
tuosta vanhasta Priitistä, niin jo saan summattomat rahat, sen verran
kuin tavallinen työmies kuukauden työstä. Sitten menen taas Helsinkiin,
kumartelen siellä suuria herroja ja saan taas kymmenet tuhannet. Kyllä
minä osaan yhteisiä varoja nakertaa niinkuin muutkin kruunun rotat.
Ei minua suotta isäni kouluttanut, vaikkei mitään tullutkaan. Mutta
minä olen sittenkin hänestä hauskan mielenkiintoinen, koska näin olen
häntä etevämpi kieroilijana enkä sitäpaitsi suoranaisesti astu hänen
varpailleen. Päinvastoin huitaisen kädelläni, kun hän tahtoisi palkita
minua vaivoistani. Se huitaisu on niinkuin laskisin käpäläni hänen
niskansa päälle.

Sellainen hän on minun kamarissani ja sellainen hän on kotonaan,
yrittävän ja kaikki voimansa ponnistavan suomalaisen maalaismiehen
perikuva vuodelta 1922.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tunnen jonkinlaista vaisua tyydytystä saatuani tämän kaiken paperille,
vaikka olenkin jo aikoja ymmärtänyt, ettei siitä tule joulukertomusta.
Se lemahtaa juhdan hieltä, niinkuin tuo kostean samerias talvipäiväkin,
joka on ollut innoittajanani.

Niin on mennyt hukkaan muutaman tunnin työ; olen vain hankkinut
itselleni tavallista ilkeämmän olon, tuon kivuttoman ahdistuksen, kun
kaikki ruumiinosat ovat niinkuin toisen ihmisen... Katson kämmenteni
selkäpuolia, laskimot ovat kadottaneet tavallisen täyteläisyytensä,
ne ovat jossain siellä nahan alla hienoina sinertävinä lankoina...
Kun hoipun portaita alakertaan, ajattelen vain sitä, että pääsisin
vuoteeseen; olisi niinkuin luontevampaa siellä... Minä melkein juoksen
ja kaatuessani poikkiteloin sänkyjen päälle ajattelen, että ne olivat
siis minun viimeiset rivini. Vastaanko niistä?

Sitä ne eivät kumminkaan olleet. Tuntikausia siinä valvoskeltuani
tuli vihdoin monien jähmettävien hätkähtelyjen jälkeen uni. Ja uni on
parasta, lähes parasta, niinkuin Strindbergin Kaarle XII sanoo.

Ja seuraava päivä oli yhä sameampi ja samoin sitä seuraava. Kunnes
vihdoin tuli jouluaatto, tuo etäisen lapsuuden muistorikas päivä, jona
matalin arki ehtoohämyssä äkisti vaihtui herkimpään juhlaan. Se oli
sekava päivä tällä kertaa, kun se oli sunnuntai. Myöhään yöllä, kun
kaikki jo nukkuivat, kuljin lasten vuoteitten ohi ja ajattelin näillä
sanoilla: Jumala siunatkoon heitä. Unen tulo oli nytkin vaikeata.
Juuri siinä rajamailla jysähti tajuntaani: Ajatteles, jos olisi sanan
mukaisesti totta raamatun kertomus ensimmäisestä jouluyöstä Betlehemin
kedoilla. Hätäännyin niinkuin valtimoa tunnustellessa, kun ei lyönti
seuraakaan ajallaan. Tunsin, etten ollut _ihan_ kunnossa siltä varalta,
että saisin varmuuden joulukertomuksen todenperäisyydestä. Nousin ylös
ja ajattelin mennä lepäämään saunan parven lempeään jälkilämpöön. Se
on onneksi paikka, jossa raadellun ihmismielen pahimmatkin myrteet
lientyvät.

Ei sitäkään, ei sitäkään minulle suotu jouluyönäni. Saunahan oli kylmä,
eihän siellä sunnuntaina voitu olla, vaikka olikin jouluaatto.

Tavallista tavallisempi yö, jota varmaan oli seuraava tavallisia päiviä
loppumattomiin. — Ei, ei toki sentään loppumattomiin...




MOSAIIKKIA


Vilkkaassa yksinäisyydessä vietetty heinäkuun päivä on takanani.
Talvella minua vaivasi turtumus, nyt kesällä heltymys. Olen taas tullut
samanlaiseen vaikeaan tilaan, kuin olin viisitoista vuotta sitten;
ero on vain siinä, että silloin löi sydämeni kiivaasti, nyt se pyrkii
liiaksikin hiljenemään.

Olen yksinäinen, vaikka talossani on väkeä yhdeksän henkeä, kaikki
läheisiä, joista en mitenkään luopuisi. Ikkunastani näen lasteni
leikkivän; niitä holhoo eno Samuli hintelä ja lapsmainen poikanen,
vaikka onkin äsken ripille päässyt. Näen heidät niinkuin jostakin
tuskastuttavan etäältä enkä pääse lähenemään.

Ei ole muuta paperille pantavaa kuin omat olot ja niitä ei kannattaisi.
Ikuinen näkymätön sanelija sanelee päättymätöntä arvoitustaan, niin
sanottua elämänarvoitusta, joka ei poistu eikä ratkea. Niin päivä
päättyy, ainoona saaliinaan ihmettely siitä, että elämä vaan jatkuu.

       *       *       *       *       *

Kysytään, lähtisinkö järvelle, uistinta soutamaan;

Samulin tekee mieli. Hän on hankkinut naapurista veneenkin.

Lähden — ensikerran vesille tänä kesänä. Ilta on mitä ihanin, vesi
melkein tyven ja taivaalla tarpeellinen määrä pilviä herättääkseen
muistimielteitä entisaikain täyteläisistä tunnelmista. On arki-ilta, ei
kuulu maalta viinan kiihdyttämien nuorukaisten mylvintääkään.

Luonto pitää puolensa. Se tehoo tajuntaan, vaikkei viheliäinen ja
luonnolle vieras nykyhetki anna tunnelmalle mitään lähtökohtaa. Muistot
tulevat omituisen kylminä ja tylyinä, niiden toteaminen tuottaa
melkein tuskaa, joka kauniina iltana veneen perässä istuen tuntuu
luonnottomalta.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hentorakenteinen poika soutaa mielikseen. Paljaat jalat punnertavat
kaaripuuhun, ihossa ja vaatteissa on kesäisen elämän tuntua... Saan
ajatuksia, jotka tiedän lämpöisiksi, mutta sisäinen lämpöaistini ei
toimi. Poikahan olisi mainio malli 90-luvun maalarille. Mitä elämyksiä
on 90-luku minulle tuottanut? Kaikkein verevimpiä, sillä minä koin ne
herkimmässä nuorukaisiässä. Meikein yhtä vereviä kuin 10-luku, jonka
keskivaiheilla olin terveimmilläni, lähtiessäni iltojen iloihin...

Juuri 90-luvulla nähtiin tuommoisia ammoin rannalta veteen kaatuneita
honkia, jommoinen tuossa nyt juuri tänä ehtoohetkenä yrittää minulle
tarjota vanhentunutta tunnelmaansa... Kaksikymmentä vuotta sitten
olin viisitoistavuotias ja sain joskus olla kesäistä yötä jossakin
mahtavissa talollissukulaisissa. Yksin jäätyäni vedin kirjahyllyltä
esiin vuosia vanhan joulualbumin, joka valoisan ikkunan pielessä avasi
pojalle aartehistonsa. Mikä tavaton taika olikaan noissa Sparren ja
Järnefeltin kuvissa, Ahon, Ingmanin ja Kauppis-Heikin kertomuksissa.
Ei voi taiteelta vaatia suurempaa tehoa kuin niillä silloin oli. Joka
lehdeltä koin noita samoja vaikutelmia, jommoinen Kauppis-Heikistä
teki kirjailijan: että oli osattu kirjoittaa niin kauniisti kuin
»pirtti unelmoi». Kuinka ihanan herkkinä sieltä astuivatkaan rakkaan
maiseman suviset illat ja yöt, salolammet tuoksuvine rantoineen,
mökit miehineen, vaimoineen ja lapsineen. Niinhän juuri vähäisintä
värähdystään myöten minäkin ne olin kokenut — ja kuinka paljon samaan
suuntaan olin vielä kokenut sellaista, jota noissa kertomuksissa ei
ollut. Jahka minäkin pääsen oikein kuvailemaan, mitä olen nähnyt ja
tuntenut kotoisina suviöinä, pirttien hämyissä, heinien tuoksuissa. Ei
ole mitään ihanampaa kuin tuommoisen tarinan tai runon kirjoittaminen.
Juhani Aho ei voi olla mikään tavallinen mies, se on vain salaperäinen
nimi, joka jossain on, näkee, kokee ja kuvaa, sellainen suloinen
luonnonherkku, joka tällaisen vuosien takaisen albumin lehdiltä valuu
silmääni ja tajuuni, niinkuin mansikat halmeelta käteeni ja suuhuni. Ja
marjapaikka on paras silloin, kun sen löytää näin sattumalta...

       *       *       *       *       *

Pohjoisella taivaalla on valtavat määrät punaisia iltapilviä, jotka
liikkumattomassa hurmiossaan lausuvat Koskenniemen runoa viimeisestä
Lusignanista. Kun olin hyvin pieni poika ja hain lehmää laitumelta,
näin iltapilvien kuviossa kuolleen sisareni ja veljeni hahmot...
Punapilvijoukkioitten alapuolella on muutamia noita meikäläisen taivaan
ihanimpia ilmestyksiä: hyvin pitkiä ja suoria, kullanhehkuvia viiruja,
joita onnellisella hetkellä olen verrannut urkujen ääneen. Tuossa on
yksi aivan erillinen, pienen pieni, tuskin huomattava, kirkas ja suora
kuin lapsen ajatus. Taivaan pilvisoiton pianissimo...

Aurinko on laskemaisillaan suoraan eteeni. Varjoon jäävien kylien
talot ja pellot turkuttavat tajuuni asiallisia sisältöjään, joitten
liiallinen tuttuus kiusaa minua. Miksette ole kukkivine törminenne ja
lehtotupsuinenne pelkkää hentoista elämän taidetta, niinkuin olitte
ennen? Miksi pyritte tehostamaan sitä tylsyyttä, joka vaiheillanne
viihtyy? Olkaa nyt hetkinen huutamatta sitä ikuista juttuanne, että
minä kerran ehkä piankin kuolen, ja härnäämättä minua sillä vanhalla,
etten muka tiedä, minkä tähden olen elänyt.

Tulehtunut mieleni kuohahtaa. — Entä jos kuolenkin. Vaikka tästä veteen
kuukahtaisin, olen elänyt ainakin sen, minkä tekin ja tulen ainakin
sinne, minne tekin. — Käännytään kotiin, Samuli — —.

Hellittää hiukan sekava mielentila. Ehkäpä sen tekee lähestyvä yö,
vaikkapa se onkin niin tuiki toinen kuin 90-luvun novelleissa ja
10-luvun omissa kokemuksissa. Suurin osa väestä on jo nukuksissa,
äiti hyräilee nuorimmalleen, sattumalta samaa säveltä kuin 1917
sinä suvi-iltana, jona elin »Aamusta iltaan». Ja niinpä muodostuu
ajatusviiva elonarvoituksen näkymättömän sanelijan lauseeseen.
Kyökin ikkunan ääri on tähän aikaan talon viehättävin iltapaikka.
Palvelustyttö on omilla teillään, piirongin päällä naksuttaa
herätyskello niinkuin yrittäisi isännälle ilmoittaa, mihin tyttö
on mennyt. Pöydän päällyksenä oleva vahakangas on kulmataipeistaan
kodikkaasti kulunut. Kahvipannussa lienee hiukan jälellä iltapäivän
keitoksesta.

Nythän on tarjolla sitä kotoista rauhaa, jota joskus perheeltäni
tiukkaan. Ota nyt hiljaisuudelta ottimesi. Iltahan on jo pitkältä
ollut erikoinen, mielteitten ja kuvien hillitöntä mosaiikkia. Sulata
ne kuvaukseksi 20-luvun illasta. Siitähän näet vinottain kapean veden
yli vanhan talon, jonka vaiheilla koit suloisia asioita yhdeksän
ja kahdeksan vuotta sitten. Syleilit ja suutelit nuorta kiinteätä
vartaloa, jossa ei ollut mitään vikaa. Vaatteet olivat halpaa kangasta,
mutta väriltään kauniin punertavia ja juontuivat keveissä viivoissa
vielä varttuvien jäsenten mukaan. Ehjässä lapsellisessa lemmenhurmassa
avautuivat perspektiivit herkästi aineettomaan onnen maahan.

Kyökin kodikas ilma, jota nyt hengitän, huomauttaa, että olen kulkenut
joltisenkin matkan silloisen perspektiivin rantaa kohden. Silloin
oli tässä paikassa mitään aavistamaton kylän vainio. Nyt on pihlajan
rungosta sähköpylvääseen vedetty nuora ja siitä riippuvat vaatteet
piirtyvät yötaivasta vastaan. Ne ovat kaikki lasten vaatteita neljältä
eri ikäkaudelta. Niinkuin jokin voimakas elävä joukko, joka kuuluu
päivään ja aavistamattomaan tulevaisuuden kymmenlukuun eikä ole öisten
mietteitten tavoitettavissa. Siinä ovat pienimmänkin, kaksikuukautisen
pallukan paidat jo kuivumassa. Ovat juuri niin, että minun niiden
yli on katsottava sitä vanhaa taloa, josta löysin neidon yhdeksän ja
kahdeksan vuotta sitten. Maallista matkaa on sinne äänen kuuluma,
kauneuden perspektiivi riittävän pitkä.

Mitäpä heistä! — Kunpa osaisi nuo sanat vielä sanoa itselleen yhtä
vakuuttavasti kuin 10-luvulla. Kunpa vielä voisi imeä itseensä sen
hunajan, joka valuu Jotunin »Arkielämän» viimeisestä luvusta, tuon
verrattoman tarinan, joka lienee 90- ja 10-lukujen välisen ajan
kukintoja, »— — itse pienen elämän salainen päämahti, sen tahto, sen
tarkoitus, että kasvoit, kypsyit ja hedelmän kannoit, — — se näkyvä
elämä, joka niin raskaalta ja tarkoituksettomalta tuntui.»

Niin kai sen pitäisi olla. Mutta kun Eveliina oli Jahvetin aitasta
astunut omaansa ja kynnyksellä istuen ja punaraitaista hamettaan
polviensa ympäri käärien avuttomana katseli nousevaa aurinkoa, niin
»Karkea paita valahti toiselta olkapäältä, kun hän kumartui, painoi
päänsä alas ja itki kuin pieni, eksynyt lapsi, joka ei tiedä missä koti
on.» Siinäpä se. Miksi siis itket Eveliina? Sanokaa Eveliinalle ja
minulle, missä on meidän kotimme.

Ajatusviiva meni ohi; näkymätön sanelija jatkaa taas arvoituksensa
sanelemista, joka kuhunkin kuuntelijaan nähden lie elämäniän pituinen.
Vasta aamupuolella tulee uni.

Heinäkuu, -23.




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MAAN TASALTA ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of Egyptian Book of the dead, by P. Le
Page Renouf

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Egyptian Book of the dead

Authors: P. Le Page Renouf
         E. Naville

Release Date: December 17, 2022 [eBook #69566]

Language: English

Produced by: Richard Tonsing, KD Weeks and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by The
             Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EGYPTIAN BOOK OF THE
DEAD ***


                          Transscriber’s Note

This version of the text cannot represent certain typographical effects.
Italics are delimited with the ‘_’ character as _italic_. Superscripted
characters are noted using a carat as ‘XV^e’, or for multiple
characters, e.g., ‘I^{er}’. Bold font is delimited with ‘=’.

Most importantly, the notes for each chapter contain hieroglyphic
images, which cannot be represented here. Each is denoted by ‘⁂’.

Footnotes have been moved to follow the paragraphs in which they are
referenced.

Minor errors, attributable to the printer, have been corrected. Please
see the transcriber’s note at the end of this text for details regarding
the handling of any textual issues encountered during its preparation.




                              THE EGYPTIAN
                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.
                      TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY,


                              BY THE LATE
                      SIR P. LE PAGE RENOUF, KNT.

                       CONTINUED AND COMPLETED BY
                 PROF. E. NAVILLE, _D.C.L., &c., &c.,_
         _Professor of Egyptology at the University of Geneva._


               _WITH VIGNETTES AND OTHER ILLUSTRATIONS._


                         PRIVATELY PRINTED FOR
                  THE SOCIETY OF BIBLICAL ARCHÆOLOGY,
                 37, GREAT RUSSELL STREET, BLOOMSBURY,
                             LONDON, 1904.




                                LONDON:
        HARRISON AND SONS, PRINTERS IN ORDINARY TO HIS MAJESTY,
                           ST. MARTIN’S LANE.




                                   TO

                              LADY RENOUF

                         THIS WORK IS DEDICATED

                IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE EXPRESSED WISH OF

                            HER LATE HUSBAND

                       SIR PETER LE PAGE RENOUF.




                                 INDEX
                                 TO THE
                                CHAPTERS
                             AND REFERENCES
                                 TO THE
                               VIGNETTES.


 CHAPTERS.                                              │     VIGNETTES.

 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┬───────────────
        I. _The Beginning of the Chapters of       pages│  Plates I, II.
             Coming forth by Day, of the Words      1, 2│
             which bring about Resurrection and         │
             Glory, and of Coming out of and            │
             entering into Amenta. Said upon the        │
             Day of Burial of_ N, _the                  │
             Victorious, who entereth after             │
             coming forth. Here is_ N _the              │
             victorious. He saith_—                     │
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────
       II. _Chapter for Coming forth by day and   11, 12│  No Vignettes.
             Living after death._                       │
      III. _Another Chapter like it._                 12│        ”
       IV. _Another Chapter, for travelling on        13│        ”
             the road which is above the earth._        │
        V. _Chapter whereby work may not be           13│        ”
             imposed [upon a person] in the             │
             Netherworld._                              │
       VI. _Chapter whereby the funereal          15, 16│        ”
             Statuettes may be made to do work          │
             for a person in the Netherworld._          │
      VII. _Chapter of passing through the chine      16│        ”
             of Apepi which is void._                   │
     VIII. _Chapter of opening the Tuat by day._      17│        ”
       IX. _Chapter for opening the Tuat._            18│        ”
        X. _Chapter for coming forth                  19│        ”
             victoriously._                             │
       XI. _Chapter for coming out against the        19│        ”
             adversary in the Netherworld._             │
      XII. _Chapter for entering and for coming       20│        ”
             forth out of the Netherworld._             │
     XIII. _Chapter for entering after coming         20│        ”
             out from Amenta._                          │
      XIV. _Chapter for removing displeasure          21│        ”
             from the heart of the god against          │
             the deceased person._                      │
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────
       XV. HYMN I.—_A Hymn to Râ at his rising._   22–25│    III, X, XV.
           [LITANY].—_Adored be Râ as he setteth  25, 26│
             in the Land of Life._                      │
           HYMN II.—_A Hymn to Râ at his          26, 27│
             setting._                                  │
           HYMN III.—_A Hymn to Tmu at his        27, 28│
             setting._                                  │
      XVI. . . . . . . . . . .                        34│         IV, V.
     XVII. _Chapter whereby one cometh forth by    35 40│       VI, VII.
             day out of the Netherworld. Let the        │
             words be said_:                            │
    XVIII. _A Litany to Thoth._                    50–53│      VIII, IX.
      XIX. _Chapter of the Crown of Triumph._     57, 58│            IX.
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────
       XX. _Another Chapter of the Crown of           59│  No Vignettes.
             Triumph._                                  │
      XXI. _Chapter whereby the Mouth of a            60│        ”
             person is given to him in the              │
             Netherworld._                              │
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────
     XXII. _Another Chapter whereby the Mouth of      61│         X, XI.
             a person is given to him in the            │
             Netherworld._                              │
    XXIII. _Chapter whereby the Mouth of a            62│         X, XI.
             person is opened for him in the            │
             Netherworld._                              │
     XXIV. _Chapter whereby the Words of Power    63, 64│             X.
             are brought to a person in the             │
             Netherworld._                              │
      XXV. _Chapter whereby a person remembereth      66│_No Vignettes._
             his name in the Netherworld._              │
     XXVI. _Chapter whereby the Heart is given        66│           XII.
             to a person in the Netherworld._           │
    XXVII. _Chapter whereby the Heart of a            69│            XI.
             person is not taken from him in the        │
             Netherworld._                              │
   XXVIII. _Chapter whereby the Heart of a        70, 71│           XII.
             person is not taken from him in the        │
             Netherworld._                              │
     XXIX. _Chapter whereby the Heart of a            72│           XII.
             person may not be taken from him in        │
             the Netherworld._                          │
    XXIXB. _Another Chapter of the Heart; upon        73│_No Vignettes._
             Carnelian._                                │
     XXXA. _Chapter whereby the Heart of a            74│           XII.
             person is not kept back from him in        │
             the Netherworld._                          │
     XXXB.                                            75│_No Vignettes._
     XXXI. _Chapter whereby the Crocodiles are        77│           XII.
             repulsed who come to carry off the         │
             Words of Power from a person in the        │
             Netherworld._                              │
    XXXII. _Chapter whereby the Crocodiles are    78, 79│_No Vignettes._
             repulsed who come to carry off the         │
             Words of Power from the glorified          │
             in the Netherworld._                       │
   XXXIII. _Chapter whereby all Serpents are          81│           XII.
             kept back._                                │
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────
    XXXIV. _Chapter whereby a person is not           82│  No Vignettes.
             devoured by the dweller in the             │
             shrine._                                   │
     XXXV. _Chapter whereby the person is not         83│        ”
             devoured by a Serpent in the               │
             Netherworld._                              │
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────
    XXXVI. _Chapter whereby the Āpshait is kept       85│     XII, XIII.
             back._                                     │
   XXXVII. _Chapter whereby the Merta Goddesses       85│          XIII.
             are kept back._                            │
  XXXVIII. _Chapter whereby one liveth by the         86│           XIII
             breath of air in the Netherworld,          │
             and keepeth back Merta._                   │
    XXXIX. _Chapter whereby the Serpent Rekrek     87-89│     XIII, XIV.
             is repulsed in the Netherworld._           │
       XL. _Chapter whereby the Eater of the Ass  91, 92│           XIV.
             is kept back._                             │
      XLI. _Chapter whereby one avoideth the          94│            XV.
             Slaughter which is carried out in          │
             the Netherworld._                          │
     XLII. _Chapter whereby one hindereth the      95–98│           XVI.
             Slaughter which is wrought at              │
             Sutenhenen._                               │
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────
    XLIII. _Chapter whereby the head of a person     101│  No Vignettes.
             is not severed from him in the             │
             Netherworld._                              │
     XLIV. _Chapter whereby one dieth not a          101│        ”
             second time._                              │
      XLV. _Chapter whereby one escapeth             102│        ”
             corruption in the Netherworld._            │
     XLVI. _Chapter whereby he that is living is     102│        ”
             not destroyed in the Netherworld._         │
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────
    XLVII. _Chapter whereby the seat of a person    102,│      XV, XVII.
             is not taken from him in the            103│
             Netherworld._                              │
    XLVIII (same as X).                                 │
      XLIX (same as XI).                                │
        L. _Chapter whereby one cometh not to        103│          XVII.
             the divine Block of Execution._            │
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────
       LI. _Chapter whereby one goeth not            104│  No Vignettes.
             headlong in the Netherworld._              │
      LII. _Chapter whereby one eateth not dirt      105│        ”
             in the Netherworld._                       │
    LIIIA. _Chapter whereby one is not made to       107│        ”
             eat dirt, or to drink lye._                │
    LIIIB. _Whereby one eateth not dirt._           107,│        ”
                                                     108│
      LIV. _Chapter whereby air is given in the      108│        ”
             Netherworld._                              │
       LV. _Another Chapter whereby air is           109│        ”
             given._                                    │
      LVI. _Another Chapter of breathing._           110│        ”
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────
     LVII. _Chapter for breathing air, and          110,│          XVII.
             command of water, in the                111│
             Netherworld._                              │
    LVIII. _Chapter for breathing air and            112│          XVII.
             command of water._                         │
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────
      LIX. _Chapter for breathing air and            113│  No Vignettes.
             command of water._                         │
       LX. _Another Chapter._                       113,│        ”
                                                     114│
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────
      LXI. _Another Chapter._                        114│          XVII.
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────
     LXII. _Chapter whereby water is drunk in       114,│  No Vignettes.
             the Netherworld._                       115│
   LXIIIA. _Chapter whereby one is not burnt        115,│        ”
             with fire, but drinketh water, in       116│
             the Netherworld._                          │
   LXIIIB. _Chapter whereby one is not boiled in     116│        ”
             water._                                    │
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────
     LXIV. _Chapter whereby one cometh forth by  117–121│          XVII.
             day from the Netherworld._                 │
      LXV. _Chapter whereby one cometh forth by      127│           XIX.
             day and prevaileth over the                │
             adversaries._                              │
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────
     LXVI. _Chapter whereby one cometh forth by      128│  No Vignettes.
             day._                                      │
    LXVII. _Chapter whereby the doors of the         128│        ”
             Tuat are opened and one cometh             │
             forth by day._                             │
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────
   LXVIII. _Chapter whereby one cometh forth by     129,│    XVIII, XIX.
             day._                                   130│
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────
     LXIX. _Otherwise said._                        130,│  No Vignettes.
                                                     131│
      LXX. _Another Chapter._                       131,│        ”
                                                     132│
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────
     LXXI. _Chapter whereby one cometh forth by  132–134│           XIX.
             day._                                      │
    LXXII. _Chapter whereby one cometh forth by     136,│       XIX, XX.
             day and passes through the              137│
             Ammehit._                                  │
    LXXIII (same as IX).                                │       XIX, XX.
    LXXIV. _Chapter whereby the legs are set in      138│       XIX, XX.
             motion upon earth._                        │
     LXXV. _Chapter whereby one cometh to           139,│  XXI, numbered
             Heliopolis and receiveth a seat         140│     LXXVIII in
             there._                                    │         error.
    LXXVI. _Chapter whereby all forms are            140│    XX. same as
             assumed which one pleaseth._               │        LXXIII.
   LXXVII. _Chapter whereby one assumeth the         141│           XXI.
             form of the Golden Hawk._                  │
  LXXVIII. _Chapter whereby one assumeth the     142–146│           XXI.
             form of the Sacred Hawk._                  │
    LXXIX. _Chapter whereby one assumeth the        147,│           XXI.
             form of the Chief god of the Divine     148│
             Cycle._                                    │
     LXXX. _Chapter whereby one assumeth the         149│_No Vignettes._
             form of the god who giveth Light to        │
             the Darkness._                             │
    LXXXI. _Chapter whereby one assumeth the         150│     XXI, XXII.
             form of the Lotus._                        │
   LXXXII. _Chapter whereby one assumeth the        150,│          XXII.
             form of Ptah, eateth bread,             151│
             drinketh beer, and sitteth in the          │
             midst of the great gods._                  │
  LXXXIII. _Chapter whereby one assumeth the        151,│          XXII.
             form of the Bennu bird._                152│
   LXXXIV. _Chapter whereby one assumeth the        152,│          XXII.
             form of the Hernshaw._                  153│
    LXXXV. _Chapter whereby one assumeth the        153,│          XXII.
             form of a Soul, that one may not        154│
             come to the dungeon. Imperishable          │
             is he who knoweth it._                     │
   LXXXVI. _Chapter whereby one assumeth the         155│          XXII.
             form of the Swallow._                      │
  LXXXVII. _Chapter whereby one assumeth the         157│   XXII, XXIII.
             form of Se-ta._                            │
 LXXXVIII. _Chapter whereby one assumeth the         157│         XXIII.
             form of the Crocodile god [Sebak]._        │
   LXXXIX. _Chapter whereby the Soul is united      157,│         XXIII.
             to the dead Body._                      158│
       XC. _Chapter whereby Memory is restored       159│         XXIII.
             to a person._                              │
      XCI. _Chapter whereby the Soul is secured      160│_No Vignettes._
             from imprisonment in the                   │
             Netherworld._                              │
     XCII. _Chapter whereby the Tomb is opened      160,│   XXIII, XXIV.
             to the Soul and to the Shade of the     161│
             person, that he may come forth by          │
             day and may have mastery of his            │
             feet._                                     │
    XCIII. _Chapter whereby one avoideth being       162│          XXIV.
             conveyed to the East in the                │
             Netherworld._                              │
     XCIV. _Chapter whereby one prayeth for a        163│          XXIV.
             Palette and an Inkstand._                  │
      XCV. _Chapter whereby is opened the place     163,│          XXIV.
             wherein Thoth resteth._                 164│
     XCVI. _Chapter whereby is opened [the           164│_No Vignettes._
             place] where Thoth [resteth]._             │
    XCVII.                                           165│           XXV.
   XCVIII. _Chapter whereby one saileth a ship      165,│           XXV.
             in the Netherworld._                    166│
     XCIX. _Chapter whereby one saileth a ship   167–169│     XXV, XXVI.
             in the Netherworld._                       │
        C. _The Book whereby the glorified one       171│         XXVII.
             is made strong, and is made to             │
             embark in the boat of Rā, together         │
             with those who are with the god._          │
       CI. _Chapter of the safeguards of the        172,│_No Vignettes._
             Bark of Rā_.                            173│
      CII. _Chapter whereby one entereth into        173│         XXVII.
             the Bark of Rā._                           │
     CIII. _Chapter whereby one openeth the          174│           XXV.
             place where Hathor abideth._               │
      CIV. _Chapter whereby one sitteth in the       174│           XXV.
             midst of the great gods._                  │
       CV. _Chapter whereby one propitiateth the     175│           XXV.
             Ka._                                       │
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────
      CVI. _Chapter whereby a largess is            176,│  No Vignettes.
             presented at Hat-ka-Ptah._              177│
     CVII.                                           178│        ”
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────
    CVIII. _Chapter whereby one knoweth the         178,│    XXV, XXVII.
             Powers of the West._                    179│
                                                        │
      CIX. _Chapter whereby one knoweth the         181,│         XXVII.
             Powers of the East._                    182│
       CX. _The Beginning of the Chapters of the 193–195│  XXVIII, XXIX.
             Garden of Hotepit, and of the              │
             Chapters of coming forth by day;           │
             and of entering and coming forth in        │
             the Netherworld, and of arriving at        │
             the Garden of Aarru, at the Rise in        │
             Hotepit and at the Grand Domain,           │
             blest with the breezes: that I may         │
             take possession there and be in            │
             Glory there: that there I may              │
             plough and mow: that there I may           │
             eat and drink and love: doing              │
             whatsoever things are done upon            │
             earth._                                    │
       CXI (same as CVIII).                             │
     CXII. _Chapter whereby one knoweth the         184,│     XXIX, XXX.
             Powers of Pu._                          185│
    CXIII. _Chapter whereby one knoweth the         186,│           XXX.
             Powers of  Nechen._                     187│
     CXIV. _Chapter whereby one knoweth the         188,│          XXXI.
             Powers of Hermopolis._                  189│
      CXV. _Chapter whereby one cometh forth        190,│_No Vignettes._
             into Heaven, and openeth the            191│
             Ammehit: and whereby the Powers of         │
             Heliopolis are known._                     │
     CXVI. _Chapter whereby one knoweth the          192│          XXXI.
             Power of Hermopolis._                      │
    CXVII. _Chapter whereby one taketh the           203│      XXXI (one
             blissful path at Restau._                  │    Vignette is
                                                        │  numbered CVII
                                                        │     in error).
   CXVIII. _Chapter whereby one arriveth at          206│_No Vignettes._
             Restau._                                   │
     CXIX. _Chapter whereby one entereth or          206│          XXXI.
             goeth forth from Restau._                  │
       CXX (same as XII).                               │
      CXXI (same as XIII).                              │
     CXXII (same as LVIII).                             │
   CXXIII. _Chapter whereby one entereth into        208│          XXXI.
             the Great House._                          │
    CXXIV. _Chapter whereby one cometh to the       210,│         XXXII.
             Divine Circle of Osiris._               211│
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────
     CXXV. PART I.—_Said on arriving at the Hall 212–214│         XXXII,
             of Righteousness, that N may be            │        XXXIII,
             loosed from all the sins which he          │         XXXIV,
             hath committed and that he may look        │          XXXV,
             upon the divine countenances._             │         XXXVI,
                                                        │       XXXVIII,
                                                        │       XXXVIII,
                                                        │         XXXIX.
           PART II.—_The Negative Confession._   214–216│        ”
           PART III.—_Said upon approaching to   216–220│        ”
             the gods who are in the Tuat._             │
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────
    CXXVI.          . . . . . . . . . .             244,│            XL.
                                                     245│
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────
   CXXVII. _The Book for invoking the gods of        249│  No Vignettes.
             the Bounds, which the person               │
             reciteth when he approacheth them,         │
             that he may enter and see the              │
             Strong one in the Great Abode of           │
             the Tuat._                                 │
  CXXVIII. _Invocation of Osiris_                   251,│        ”
                                                     252│
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────
     CXXIX (same as C).                                 │            XL.
     CXXX. _A Book whereby the Soul is made to   256–259│            XL.
             live for ever, on the day of               │
             entering into the Bark of Rā, and          │
             to pass the Sheniu of the Tuat.            │
             Made on the Birthday of Osiris._           │
    CXXXI. _Chapter whereby one proceedeth into      261│           XLI.
             Heaven by the side of Rā._                 │
   CXXXII. _Chapter whereby a person is enabled      263│           XLI.
             to go round, to visit his dwelling         │
             in the Netherworld._                       │
  CXXXIII. _Book whereby the deceased acquireth     264,│     XLI, XLII.
             might in the Netherworld, in            265│
             presence of the great cycle of the         │
             gods._                                     │
   CXXXIV. _Chapter whereby the deceased            267,│           XLI.
             acquireth might._                       268│
    CXXXV. _Another chapter recited when the        269,│_No Vignettes._
             Moon renews itself on the first day     270│
             of the month._                             │
  CXXXVIA. _Chapter whereby one is conveyed in       270│          XLII.
             the Bark of Rā._                           │
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────
  CXXXVIB. _Chapter whereby one is conveyed in      271,│  No Vignettes.
             the Great Bark of Rā to pass            272│
             through the orbit of flame._               │
 CXXXVIIA. _Chapter whereby a Light is kindled       275│        ”
             for a person._                             │
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────
 CXXXVIIB. _Chapter whereby a Light is kindled       275│          XLII.
             for a person._                             │
 CXXXVIII. _Chapter whereby one is enabled to        277│         XLIII.
             enter into Abydos._                        │
                                                        │
    CXXXIX (same as CXXIII).                            │
                                                        │
      CXL. _The book read on the last day of        280,│   XLIII, XLIV.
             Mechir, when the Eye is full on the     281│
             last day of Mechir._                       │
                                                        │
  CXLI. to _The Book said by a man or his father 282–285│     XLIV, XLV,
   CXLIII.   or his son in the festival of the          │          XLVI.
             Amenta, and wherewith he acquires          │
             might with Rā, and with the gods           │
             when he is with them. Said on the          │
             day of the new Moon, when offerings        │
             are made of bread, beer, oxen,             │
             geese, and burnt incense to—_              │
    CXLIV. _The Chapter of the Arrival._         287–289│   XLVI, XLVII,
                                                        │       XLIX, L.
  CXLV and _The knowing of the pylons of the     292–294│  XLIV, XLVIII,
    CXLVI.   house of Osiris, in the Garden of          │          LIII.
             Aarru._                                    │
   CXLVII.                                       296–298│       XLIX, L.
  CXLVIII. _Giving sustenance to the deceased in 300–301│   XLVI, XLVII,
             the Netherworld, and delivering him        │            LI.
             from all evil things._                     │
    CXLIX.                                       302–307│           LII.
       CL.                                           309│          LIII.
      CLI.                                           309│      LIV, LVI.
     CLIA.                                           313│_No Vignettes._
     _bis_                                              │
     CLIA. _Chapter of the mysterious head._            │           LIV.
     _ter_                                              │
     CLII. _Chapter of building a house on           314│           LIV.
             earth._                                    │
   CLIIIA. _Chapter of coming out of the net._      315,│            LV.
                                                     316│
   CLIIIB. _Chapter of escaping from the            320,│           LVI.
             catchers of fish._                      321│
     CLIV. _Chapter of not letting the body         322,│           LVI.
             decay in the Netherworld._              323│
      CLV. _Chapter of the Tat of gold._             325│     LVI, LVII.
     CLVI. _Chapter of the buckle of carnelian,      326│     LVI, LVII.
             which is put on the neck of the            │
             deceased._                                 │
    CLVII. _Chapter of the vulture of gold, put     326,│          LVII.
             on the neck of the deceased._           327│
   CLVIII. _Chapter of the collar of gold, put       327│          LVII.
             on the neck of the deceased._              │
     CLIX. _Chapter of the column of green          327,│          LVII.
             Felspar, put on the neck of the         328│
             deceased._                                 │
      CLX. _Giving the column of green Felspar._     328│          LVII.
     CLXI. _Chapter of unfastening the opening      329,│            LV.
             in the sky. Thoth does it so that       330│
             it may be finished when he opens           │
             (the sky) with Aten._                      │
    CLXII. _Chapter of causing a flame to arise     330,│         LVIII.
             under the head of the deceased._        321│
   CLXIII. _Chapters brought from another book,     333,│         LVIII.
             in addition to the “coming forth by     334│
             day.” Chapter of not letting the           │
             body of a man decay in the                 │
             Netherworld, of rescuing him from          │
             the devourers of souls who imprison        │
             men in the Tuat, and of not raising        │
             his sins on earth against him, but         │
             of saving his flesh and his bones          │
             from the worms and from every              │
             evil-doing god in the Netherworld,         │
             so that he may go in and out as he         │
             likes, and do everything he desires        │
             without restraint._                        │
    CLXIV. _Another Chapter._                       336,│         LVIII.
                                                     337│
     CLXV. _Chapter of landing and not being        338,│         LVIII.
             obscured, so that the body may          339│
             prosper in drinking water._                │
    CLXVI. _Chapter of the Pillow._                  340│         LVIII.
   CLXVII. _Chapter of bringing an Eye._             341│         LVIII.
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────
  CLXVIII.                                           341│  No Vignettes.
    CLXIX. _Chapter of raising the funereal      342–344│        ”
             Bed._                                      │
     CLXX. _Chapter of arranging the funereal    345–347│        ”
             Bed._                                      │
    CLXXI. _Chapter of wrapping up (the              347│        ”
             deceased) in a pure garment._              │
   CLXXII. _Beginning of the Chapter of reciting 348–351│        ”
             the ceremonies made in the                 │
             Netherworld._                              │
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────
  CLXXIII. _The addresses of Horus to his father    352,│           LIX.
             when he goes in to see his father,      353│
             and when he comes out of his great         │
             sanctuary to see him Rā Unneferu,          │
             the master of Ta-tser, and then            │
             they embrace one another; therefore        │
             he is glorious in the Netherworld._        │
   CLXXIV. _Chapter of causing the Chu to come      354,│            LX.
             out of the great door in the sky._      355│
    CLXXV. _Chapter of not dying a second death     356,│            LX.
             in the Netherworld._                    357│
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────
   CLXXVI. _Chapter of not dying a second time       358│  No Vignettes.
             in the Netherworld._                       │
  CLXXVII. _Chapter of raising the Chu, of           359│        ”
             vivifying his soul in the                  │
             Netherworld._                              │
 CLXXVIII. _Chapter of raising the body, of      360–363│        ”
             giving it eyes, of making it               │
             possess ears, of fixing its head,          │
             of putting it on its base._                │
   CLXXIX. _Chapter of coming forth when going      363,│        ”
             out of yesterday and coming in the      364│
             (present) day, being equipped by           │
             one’s own hands._                          │
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────
    CLXXX. _Chapter of coming forth by day, of   365–367│            LX.
             giving praise to Rā in the Amenta,         │
             of paying homage to the inhabitants        │
             of the Tuat, of opening the way to         │
             the mighty soul in the Netherworld,        │
             of letting him walk, lengthen his          │
             strides, and go in and out in the          │
             Netherworld; and take the form of a        │
             living soul._                              │
   CLXXXI. _Chapter of arriving before the          368,│           LXI.
             Divine circle of Osiris and before      369│
             the gods, the guides in the Tuat,          │
             before the guards of their halls,          │
             the heralds of their gates and the         │
             doorkeepers of their pylons in the         │
             Amenta, and of taking the form of a        │
             living soul and praising Osiris the        │
             lord of his circle of gods._               │
  CLXXXII. _Book of vivifying Osiris, of giving  370–372│           LXI.
             air to him whose heart is                  │
             motionless, through the action of          │
             Thoth, who repels the enemies of           │
             Osiris who comes there in his              │
             form ... as protector, saviour,            │
             defender in the Netherworld._              │
           _It is said by Thoth himself, so that        │
             the morning light may shine on him         │
             (Osiris) every day._                       │
 CLXXXIII. _Adoration to Osiris, giving him      372–374│            LX.
             praise, bowing down before                 │
             Unneferu, falling on one’s face            │
             before the lord of Ta-tsert, and           │
             exalting him who is on his sand._          │
  CLXXXIV. _Chapter of being near Osiris._           375│            LX.
   CLXXXV. _Giving praise to Osiris, falling on      375│            LX.
             the earth before the lord of               │
             eternity; propitiating the god with        │
             what he loves, speaking the truth,         │
             the lord of which is not known._           │
  CLXXXVI. _Adoration to Hathor, the lady of the     376│      LX, LXII.
             West, falling down before Mehurit._        │




                             INTRODUCTION.


When, in the year 1892, Sir Peter Le Page Renouf began the publication
of his translation of the Book of the Dead, his intention was that the
work, once completed, should be preceded by an elaborate Introduction,
giving, besides all the information concerning the form and the history
of the book, his views as to its sense and its religious value.

As with the unfinished part of the translation,[1] so here, we are left
without any notes or any clue whatever as to the form which this
introduction was to have taken, and we are obliged to resort to the
fifth of the Hibbert lectures, given by Renouf in 1879, in order to know
his views about the book.[2]

Before speaking of its contents, we have to state briefly under what
form the book has come down to us. It is hardly necessary to repeat that
it is no book at all in the ordinary sense of the word. It is neither a
unity nor a whole, it is a collection which has grown by degrees, at
various epochs. Undoubtedly part of it goes back as far as the Old
Empire; the texts of the Middle Empire show already that there were
various editions, and we are forced to admit that its origin is not much
later than the beginning of Egyptian civilization, as we see that some
of the rubrics attribute certain chapters to a king of the 1st dynasty.
In the course of centuries the original text was modified and enlarged,
new chapters were added, revisions were made, without casting these
detached fragments into a whole. The various parts of the book were
always independent, like the Hebrew Psalms; the acceptance of a chapter
does not necessarily imply the acceptance of the next chapter, and it
seems as if the relatives of the deceased chose in the collection which
was at their disposal what they liked best, and the number of chapters
which corresponded to the price they wished to pay for a papyrus.

This description applies chiefly to the texts of the Book of the Dead of
the period prior to the XXVIth dynasty. Under the Saïte kings it seems
that a complete revision of the text was made; a definite order was
adopted, which was not rigidly binding on the writers, but to which they
generally adhered; various chapters were added, especially the last
ones, 162-165, which are never found in the older copies. It seems also
that something like what we should call an authorized version was
adopted; and this was done by men to whom the book was hardly
intelligible. A great many glosses were introduced, which were copied
afterwards in all the hieroglyphic and hieratic texts. Although we do
not find the strict accuracy of Hebrew manuscripts, the number of
variants in the Saïte, Ptolemaïc or Roman texts is considerably smaller
than in the manuscripts of the Theban period, and a collation of the
hundreds of papyri of late epoch which fill our museums would lead to no
great result.

However, it is from a text generally considered as Saïtic, but which I
believe to be of the Ptolemaïc epoch, that the Book of the Dead has been
first made known in all its extent. In 1842 Lepsius published the long
papyrus in the Turin Museum, a document which he called “the largest
piece of Egyptian literature which has been preserved.”

Before him Champollion had seen it, and had noticed that a great number
of repetitions of the same text existed in various museums. He made use
of it in his grammar, quoted here and there a sentence taken from it,
but he did not make a special study of the document. Lepsius understood
at once the importance of the book, which was the _vade-mecum_ of the
deceased, and seeing how much more extensive the Turin Papyrus was than
the short copies which had been published before, he traced the whole
document and published it two years afterwards.

Lepsius gave to this work the name of _Todtenbuch_, “Book of the Dead,”
in opposition to the name of “Ritual” adopted by Champollion, which is
certainly incorrect. It is no Ritual; a few chapters with a ritualistic
character have been introduced into it; for instance, the chapter
connected with the ceremony of “opening the mouth of the deceased,”
which is occasionally met with, or Chapter 171, “chapter of wrapping up
(the deceased) in a pure garment;” but these are rare exceptions. On the
whole the Book of the Dead differs widely from a Ritual. It is not the
priest who speaks, there are no minute prescriptions as to how a
ceremony is to be performed; all the prayers and hymns are put in the
deceased’s mouth, it is he whose speech is supposed to be heard in the
other world.

_Todtenbuch_, Book of the Dead, is not a translation of the Egyptian
title, which is: book of ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _pert m hru_. As Renouf
says, “Three simple words, perfectly unambiguous when taken singly, but
by no means easy of explanation when taken together without a context;”
and in fact at the present day no final translation has been given of
these three words. Renouf translates, “coming forth by day,” as will be
seen in the numerous examples which occur in this volume; but several
objections may be raised against this interpretation, to which we should
prefer, “coming out of the day,” the day being the period of a man’s
life, having its morning and its evening.

The book is divided into fragments called ⁂, to each of which Lepsius
has given a number, following the order of the great Turin Papyrus, and
which he calls chapters. Although his numbering is not quite correct, it
has been adhered to in all the subsequent editions.

In his lecture[3] on the Book of the Dead, Renouf insists on the
difficulty of translating it: “Nothing can exceed the simplicity and the
brevity of the sentences; and yet the difficulties which a translator
has to overcome are very great. In the first place, the text is
extremely corrupt. The unsatisfactory condition of the text is owing to
different causes. The reasons which writers on Hebrew, Greek or Latin
palæography have enumerated for the purpose of accounting for mistakes
in manuscripts, apply with much greater force to the funereal
manuscripts of the Egyptians; for as these were not intended to be seen
by any mortal eye, but to remain for ever undisturbed in the tomb, the
unconscientious scribe had no such check upon his carelessness as if his
work were liable to be subjected to the constant inspection of the
living. But the most conscientious scribe might easily commit numerous
errors. Many of them are to be traced to a confusion between signs which
resemble each other in the cursive, or as it is called, the hieratic
character, but not in hieroglyphic writing.

“Besides the errors of copyists, there are different readings, the
origin of which is to be traced to the period during which the chapters
were handed down by word of mouth only. There are copies which bear
evidence that a critical choice has been made between the different
readings of a passage, but the common practice was to admit the
inconsistent readings into the text itself....

“Some of the variants have unquestionably arisen from the difficulty of
understanding the ancient texts. I have no doubt whatever that some of
the chapters of the Book of the Dead were as obscure to Egyptians living
under the eleventh dynasty as they are to ourselves.... The most
accurate knowledge of the Egyptian vocabulary and grammar will however
not suffice to pierce the obscurity arising from what M. de Rougé called
symbols or allegories, which are in fact simple mythological allusions.
The difficulty is not in literally translating the text, but in
understanding the meaning which lies concealed beneath familiar words.”

These words of Renouf have still a very great force, although in the
last twenty years some progress has been made towards a better
understanding of the text. When Renouf gave the above description of the
difficulties of the translation, the main source from which he could
derive his information was what he called “the corrupt Turin text.”
Since then a critical edition has been made.[4] It is based on texts of
the XVIIIth and XIXth dynasties, written at a time when the intelligence
of the book was not lost to the same extent as under the Saïtes or the
Ptolemies, as may be ascertained from the considerable number of glosses
introduced into the Turin text which are absent from the older versions.
This edition has been compiled from various papyri, as the older ones
are much shorter than the later ones; it is not a single document like
Lepsius’s _Todtenbuch_; most of the chapters have been found in their
old form; a few are missing, but a good number have been added to the
list which have fallen out of the late versions. Generally it is from
this critical text that Renouf made his translation. Occasionally he may
choose an older version from a tomb, or perhaps a papyrus of the British
Museum, but he hardly ever reverts to the Turin _Todtenbuch_ unless he
has no other resource at his disposal.

Nevertheless the difficulties which Renouf enumerates are only partly
removed. We are still very far from being able to give a final
translation of the Book of the Dead, and I have no doubt that Renouf
would repeat about his own work what he says of Dr. Birch’s translation,
“Many parts of it, where most faithful to the original, must in
consequence of that very fidelity be utterly unintelligible to an
English reader.”

No doubt Renouf’s translation is a great step towards making the book
more intelligible; still the reader may often stumble over sentences out
of which it is hardly possible to make a reasonable sense, in spite of
their grammatical correctness, and which at first sight will seem
childish, not to say, with Renouf, “outrageous nonsense.” But we may say
with certainty that they were not so to the old Egyptians. Under this
extraordinary or even ridiculous garment may be hidden some very simple,
or even elementary truths. Let us remember that we have not yet
unravelled all the intricacies of the Egyptian mythology, which plays
such an important part in the book. Moreover, we only begin now to
understand how the Egyptians expressed abstract ideas. When we speak of
passion, shame, remorse, hope, we have so thoroughly lost sight of the
concrete element in these words, that we are apt to forget that
originally they must have been metaphors, and that they must have
expressed something striking the senses, and connected with the material
world. An instance will illustrate the difficulty in this translation.

Chapter 112 relates how, owing to an imprudent request, Horus was the
victim of Sutu, who inflicted a wound on his eye, which caused him great
suffering, and the text adds: ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, _lo! he
ate his heart_. Renouf translates, “and wrath devoured his heart.” I
should prefer, “he regretted sorely (his foolish request).” I believe to
eat one’s heart to mean, “to feel regret, repentance, or remorse.” There
the abstract meaning is not difficult to find out; but in other cases,
as long as we have not discovered the key to the metaphor, we may go far
astray, or if we do not go beyond the literal explanation, we miss the
abstract sense, which is the true one.

However, because the work will not bear the character of finality,
because some obscurities will not be removed, and some difficulties
remain unsolved, there is no reason why a scholar like Renouf should
have shrunk from attempting the translation of the Book of the Dead, a
work which he had before his eyes for years, and which he considered as
the crown of his Egyptological labours.


The lecture quoted above gives us Renouf’s ideas as to the purpose and
the sense of the book: it is the beatification of the dead considered in
three aspects:

The renewed existence “as upon earth.” The deceased enjoys an existence
similar to that which he has led upon earth; he has the use of his
limbs, he eats and drinks and satisfies every one of his physical wants
exactly as in his former life. The gods themselves minister to him
occasionally, and contribute to his welfare and to his pleasures. The
bliss of the future state consists chiefly in the pleasures of
agricultural life.

Transformation. The deceased has the range of the entire universe in
every shape and form he desires. He can assume any appearance he likes.
But these transformations are not forced upon him; he has no definite
series to go through; they depend simply on his pleasure.

Identification with Osiris and other gods. The identification with
Osiris, which is already mentioned in the earliest parts of the book, is
taken for granted later on, since the name of the deceased is always
preceded by “Osiris.” He may be assimilated to other gods; for instance,
in the 42nd chapter every limb is assimilated to a different deity. This
Osirian nature gives the deceased the power to triumph over the numerous
enemies whom he has to face.

To these three benefits which the book confers on the deceased we should
add a fourth: viz., complete preservation from dismemberment and decay.
There is evidently in some of the prayers a remembrance of a time when
the deceased were dismembered at their burial; and this way of treating
the corpse is for the deceased an object of horror. The frequent mention
of reconstituting the body, the promises that no part of it shall be
taken away, all this shows of what supreme importance it was for him
that his body should remain intact. Without a well preserved body there
could be no life in the other world; its destruction implies the
destruction of the whole individual. This belief is the origin of
mummification, for decay is the strongest agent of dismemberment and the
certain ruin of the body.

These are the outlines of the principal tenets of the Book of the Dead.
If we inquire where they originated, there is no doubt that the bulk of
the book came from Heliopolis. It is the doctrine of that ancient city
and of its priests. Some of the chapters may be attributed to the
priests at Abydos, as M. Maspero suggests; but it seems certain that,
except for a small part, the birthplace of the Book of the Dead is the
city of Ra Tmu, the place connected with the oldest religious traditions
of the country, and which may rightly be called the religious capital of
Egypt.

_January, 1904._

EDOUARD NAVILLE.

-----

Footnote 1:

  See _Introductory Note to Chapter CXL_.

Footnote 2:

  The Hibbert Lectures, 1879, p. 172.

Footnote 3:

  See also _Life Work_, t. III, p. 51, “The title of the Book of the
  Dead,” and p. 59, “The Egyptian Book of the Dead.”

Footnote 4:

  _Das Aegyptische Todtenbuch der XVIII bis XX Dynastie_,
  zusammengestellt und herausgegeben von Edouard Naville, Berlin, 1886.




                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.




                               CHAPTER I.

(1.)_The Beginning of the Chapters of Coming forth by Day, of the_
  (2.)_Words which bring about Resurrection and Glory, and of Coming out
  of and entering into Amenta. Said upon the Day of Burial of_ N, _the
  Victorious,_(3.) _who entereth after coming forth_.(4.) _Here is_ N
  _the Victorious. He saith_—


O (5.)Bull of Amenta, It is Thoth, the everlasting King, who is here.

I am the great god in the Bark, who have fought for thee.

I am one of those gods, the (6.)Powers who effect the triumph of Osiris
over his adversaries on the day of the Weighing of the Words: I am thy
kinsman, Osiris.

I am one of those gods to whom Nut hath given birth, who slay the
adversaries of Osiris and imprison the (7.)Sebau, on his behalf: I am
thy kinsman, Horus.

I have fought for thee, and have prevailed for thy name.

I am Thoth who effect the triumph of Osiris over his adversaries on that
day of Weighing of the Words in the (8.)House of the Prince, which is in
Heliopolis.

I am (9.)Tatti, the son of Tatti, conceived in Tattu and born in Tattu;
and Tattu is my name.

I am with the mourners and weepers who wail over Osiris in (10.)Rechit,
and who effect the triumph of Osiris over his adversaries.

Rā issued the mandate to Thoth, that he should effect the triumph of
Osiris against his adversaries, and the mandate is what Thoth hath
executed.

I am with Horus on the day of covering (11.)Teshtesh and of opening the
fountains for the refreshment of (12.)the god whose heart is motionless,
and closing the entrance to the hidden things in (13.)Restau.

I am with Horus, as the avenger of that left arm of Osiris which is in
(14.)Sechem.

I enter in, and I come forth from the (15.)Tank of Flame on the day when
the adversaries are annihilated at Sechem.

I am with Horus on the day when the festivals of Osiris are celebrated,
and when offerings are made [to Rā], on the Feast of the Sixth day of
the Month, and on the Feast of Tenait(16.) in Heliopolis.

I am the Priest(17.) in Tattu and exalt him who is on the Height.(18.)

I am the Prophet in Abydos on the day when the earth is raised.

I am he who seeth what is shut up at Restau.(19.)

I am he who reciteth the liturgies of the (20.)Soul who is Lord of
Tattu.

I am the Sem-priest in all that pertaineth to his office.

I am the Arch-Craftsman, on the day in which the Ship of Sokaru is laid
upon its stocks.(21.)

I am he who seizeth the mattock, on the day of the Feast of Hoeing in
Suten-henen.(22.)

O ye who bring beneficent souls into the house of Osiris, do ye bring
the soul of _N_ together with you into the house of Osiris; let him see
as you see, let him hear as you hear, let him stand as you stand, and
sit as you sit [in the house of Osiris].

O ye who give bread and beer to beneficent souls in the house of Osiris,
do you give bread and beer at the two periods to the soul of _N_ who is
with you.

O ye who unclose the ways and open the roads to beneficent souls in the
house of Osiris, unclose then the ways and open the roads to the soul of
_N_ who is with you, let him enter boldly and come forth in peace at the
house of Osiris, without hindrance and without repulse. Let him enter at
his pleasure and go forth at his will, triumphantly with you; and let
that be executed which he shall order in the house of Osiris.

No lightness of his in the scale has been found and the Balance is
(23.)relieved of his case.

PLATE I.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER I.
  Papyrus in the British Museum.
  No. 9901.
  _See_ NAVILLE, “Book of the Dead,” I, Pl. I and II.
]

                                 NOTES.

The text taken for the basis of the translation of Chapter I is that of
the papyrus of Huneferu; _Ag_ of M. Naville’s edition.

1. The title here translated is that usual in all the papyri
representing the third period of the text. It occurs however in the
papyrus _Ag_ of Huneferu, who lived in the days of Seti I, at the
beginning of the XIXth dynasty. It is also found in the papyrus of Ani.
The most common title of Chapter I in the older manuscripts is
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, “Chapter of coming to the
divine Powers attached to Osiris.” These divine Powers are Amsta, Hapi,
Tuamautef and Qebehsenuf, the children of Horus, who stand upon the
lotus which springs from the water beneath the throne of Osiris, in
pictures of the Psychostasia. Chapter 124 bears the same title in the
older manuscripts, which sometimes begin with it.

2. ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. These are two very difficult words,
and very different meanings have been assigned to them. But when the
entire evidence is examined the result is plain enough. Each of the
words has for determinative the sign, ⁂, expressive of some kind of
utterance. It is a λόγος of some kind has for its first letter the
causative ⁂. The question therefore is, what are the meanings of the
simpler forms ⁂⁂, _tes_, and ⁂⁂⁂, _ḫu_?

The most common, indeed the only true, meaning of ⁂⁂ is
‘rising,’ and even ‘raising.’ This is too well-known to require proof.
⁂⁂ is ‘causing to rise.’ The Pyramid text of Teta says (l. 270),
“Horus hath given his children that they may raise thee up
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.” In the same religious text, l. 248,
⁂⁂ is the _rising from the funereal couch_ after the ⁂⁂,
the recitations made over the dead.

The ‘raising up’ or ‘resurrection’ here spoken of is said not only of
the soul but of the body of the deceased person. The papyrus of Nebseni
has preserved two chapters, to which M. Naville has assigned the numbers
177 and 178.

177. ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

_Chapter of raising up the Chu, and giving life to the Soul in the
Netherworld._

178.
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

_Chapter of raising up the body, of giving it eyes and the possession of
ears, and establishing the head, made firm on its props._

⁂, _ḫat_, is not simply the body; it is the _dead body_, that which
has _fallen_, like the Latin _cadaver_, the Greek πτῶμα, the Hebrew
מַפֶלֶח. (See _Transactions Soc. Bib. Arch._, Vol. VIII, p. 221, note 2.)

The true meaning of ⁂⁂⁂ _ḫu_ is not ‘luminous’ but
‘clear, distinct, glittering, ‘_coruscans_,’ and hence ‘bright,
splendid, illustrious, glorious,’ and the like. Like the Greek
λαμπρός, the Latin _clarus_, the Hebrew עהל, or the French
_éclat_, it is applied to sound as well as to light. It is said of
Thoth (in the wretched orthography[5] of a tablet of the XIXth
dynasty) ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ “he glorified
them with the clear utterances of his mouth.” ⁂⁂⁂
corresponds to the Greek λαμπροφωνία. As a verb ⁂⁂ is
_clareo_, and is ⁂⁂⁂ _clarifico_, _glorifico_.

There are, it is true, variants in the title of Chapter 17, giving the
form ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. In spite of the excellent authority of
these variants, they must be considered as giving an erroneous reading.
The words ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ ‘remember,’ and ⁂⁂⁂ are
different in origin and meaning. The latter signifies ‘confer glory,’
and the ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ are religious formularies recited by
priests, identifying the deceased person with Osiris and other
divinities. There are numerous pictures in the tombs representing
priests performing this office.[6]

3. M. Déveria has produced excellent evidence showing that ⁂
_maāt-ḫeru_ has the sense of ‘victorious, triumphant.’ But the sense of
_véridique_ is untenable. ⁂⁂⁂ _ḫeru_ is ‘voice’ not ‘speech.’
In _Proceedings S.B.A._, Vol. VI, p. 192, note, I have quoted a passage
from a chapter (now numbered 181 in M. Naville’s edition) in which
⁂⁂⁂⁂ signifies ‘want of success, failure.’

⁂⁂⁂⁂ _maāt ḫeru_ really signifies “one whose voice is Law.”
It is essentially a _divine_ title (see “Altar at Turin,”
_Transactions_, III, pl. II, _line_ 10, appended to Mr. Bonomi’s
article), and in _no_ Egyptian text is it used of mortals supposed to be
living. The translation “juste de voix,” limits the conception of _maāt_
to _one_ of its secondary acceptations.

⁂⁂⁂⁂ _semaāt ḫeru_ is also, and necessarily so, a divine
act, that of Thoth; and it is done through his utterances.

4. ⁂ _ȧn_ in this place as in very many others is not a preposition,
_still less is it a verb_. It is a demonstrative particle, like the
Latin _en_, _ecce_, or the Hebrew הֵו. Nothing is more common than this
particle followed only by a proper name, _e.g._, on the funereal
figures. There is not the slightest reason for supposing that there is
an ellipse of the verb ‘saith.’ The particle is used like the
corresponding Latin one under the Scottish picture of Edward I--

               ‘En rex Edwardus debacchans ut leopardus.’

When I translate ⁂⁂⁂ ⁂⁂⁂, “It is Thoth--who is here,”
I do not wish to imply that ⁂⁂ is the verb _to be_, any more than
I should in the frequent expression ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ “It is his
son who revives his name.” ⁂ is a demonstrative particle and nothing
else.

Instead of looking out for moods and tenses and paradigms, Egyptologists
ought to wake to the consciousness that the Egyptians never rose to the
conception of what we mean by a _verb_.

5. The Bull of Amenta is Osiris. Bull, like Lion or Hawk, was one of the
figurative names of gods or kings, and Osiris is sometimes represented
with a Bull’s head.

6. ⁂⁂⁂⁂ _T’at’at_. This word is often wrongly translated
‘judges.’ The divine judges are called _t’at’at_, but the proposition is
not simply convertible. There were the ⁂⁂⁂⁂ not only of
Osiris, but (_Todt._, 22, 2) also of every god and every goddess. And
all the ancient towns of Egypt had their divine ⁂⁂⁂⁂. It is
a term used (_cf._ p. 55) as exactly synonymous with ⁂⁂. In a
mythological system like the Egyptian no god stood alone; every god
involved others in close connection with himself, and every act of his
necessitated corresponding acts on their part.

7. The _sebȧu_ are the enemies of the _Sun_, either as Rā or Osiris. I
believe that under this mythological name the dark clouds are
personified.

8. _Het Saru_, ‘House of the Prince,’ is the name of the great Sanctuary
at Heliopolis. It must be remembered however that many of the
geographical localities named in the Book of the Dead have their
counterparts in the Egyptian heaven.

9. ⁂⁂⁂⁂ or ⁂⁂⁂, the ‘firm, stable, unalterable,
abiding, eternal one,’ whose origin and progress are in eternity. The
city ⁂⁂⁂⁂ or ⁂⁂⁂⁂ has a name like the
Palestinian עַוָֹה, Gazah, the ‘strong’ city, and many other Hebrew names
connected with the root עזז.

10. _Rechit_, a locality in the north of Egypt. The mourners and weepers
alluded to are chiefly Isis and Nephthys.

11. _Teshtesh_ is one of the names of Osiris; perhaps, as might be
inferred from a text at Dendera, of his molten image.

12. The god “whose heart is motionless” is Osiris.

13. ⁂⁂ _Re-stau_, one of the gates of the Netherworld. Its
situation is specified in Chapter 17, line 19.

14. _Sechem._ Letopolis, where the arm of Osiris had been deposited,
when the other limbs of the god were dispersed throughout the cities of
Egypt.

15. The _Tank of Flame_, as may be inferred from the vignettes of the
papyri, is where the sun rises or sets. _Cf._, Unas, 393, 506.

16. _Tenait._ Feast of the seventh day of the month.

17. The speaker now assumes the persons of various priests in
succession, the ⁂⁂ _āb_, the ⁂⁂⁂ _ḥen nutȧr_ (prophet),
the ⁂⁂⁂ _sem_, and the ⁂⁂⁂⁂ _ura ḫerp ḥem_;[7] and
he describes himself as performing certain religious ceremonies. It must
never be forgotten when reading these texts that the Egyptian priests
had _divine titles_, and that their ceremonies were dramatic, and
symbolical of the acts performed by the gods.

18. The text here is hopelessly corrupt. The translation given follows
_Ag_.

Instead of ⁂⁂⁂ _exalt_, several MSS. have
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, which has been rendered _anoint with oil_. One
might translate the Turin text, “I lustrate with water in Tattu and with
oil in Abydos, exalting him who is in the heights (_in excelsis_),” for
this text combines different readings. But ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, as it
is written, may have another meaning. ⁂⁂⁂ _beq_, signifies
‘clear, bright, shining,’ and the olive tree derives its name from this.
The determinative ⁂ and the causative ⁂ furnish the sense, ‘I make
bright, illustrious, glorious,’ ‘I celebrate or glorify.’ ‘He is who on
the height’ (= עליון) is, according to Chapter 17, the Sun.

19. This is perhaps supposed to be said by the priest called ⁂⁂,
the ‘Arch-seer,’ at Heliopolis.

20. One of the designations of Osiris. Perhaps the word _Ba_ should be
translated Ram, for in the Mendesian Nome Osiris was worshipped under
this form, and was called ⁂⁂⁂ _ḣeru šefit_, ‘god of the strong
face.’ The fact is that whether applied to the _soul_ or to a _ram_, the
word _ba_ is expressive of ‘power, force.’ The same word under the form
⁂⁂⁂⁂ is used in Chapter 120, 2 (= 12, 2) in the sense of
‘splitting up.’ And this is clearly the Egyptian concept of the
soul--‘the internal force, that which works within us,’ τὸ ἐνεργοῦν.

The word is ideographically written ⁂ or ⁂,[8] both the Ram and
the cranelike bird being called _ba_. Some have cleverly inferred that
the Egyptians thought that the soul was of a birdlike form, and others
have not hesitated to consider _ba_ as expressive of the cry of the
_ram_. The odd thing is that only the ram has this name, not the _sheep_
or the _lamb_, who nevertheless indulge in the same cry. The truth is
that in spite of appearances the word _ba_ is not onomatopoeic here.
Whether applied to the ram or to the heron, the word is expressive of
human action and signifies ‘digging through, cleaving, piercing,
splitting.’ The hieroglyphic variants are very expressive: ⁂⁂⁂,
⁂⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂
(the last is already found in _Denkm._ II, 51).

The Ram is called in Egyptian _ba_ on account of the digs which he makes
with his head, and a force which has occasioned the name of ‘ram’ to be
given to powerful engines.

The Heron is also called _ba_ because with its bill it _cleaves_ the
fishes which it attacks.

And the word which _we_ translate Soul or Spirit is called _ba_, because
it is conceived as something which ‘pierces, penetrates and divides.’

It is right to point out (to those who may wonder at this Egyptian
etymology) that the Latin _scio_ ‘I know’ is etymologically akin to
_seco_ ‘cut,’ _securis_ ‘an axe,’ and the Greek κείω, κεάζω ‘split,
cleave.’

21. The ⁂⁂⁂ _sem_, and the ⁂⁂⁂ _urȧ ḫerp ḥem_, were
priests in the service of Ptah. The latter, who held perhaps the highest
sacerdotal office in Egypt, as high priest of Ptah at Memphis, is
repeatedly found combining with his own special office that of the
_sem_. The ceremony which is here referred to consisted in a grand
procession round the walls of the great sanctuary of Ptah, conveying
upon a sledge the bark ⁂ in which the coffin of the god was supposed
to rest. Sokaru signifies ‘the coffined,’ and Ptah Sokaru is only a form
of Osiris. Abundant details of the ceremony will be found in the plates
of M. Mariette’s _Abydos_, I, pl. 36 and following. The king Seti I is
represented as a Sem priest presiding at the festival.

22. ⁂⁂⁂⁂ _Suten-ḥenen_ was called by the Greeks
Heracleopolis.

23. Or ‘rid of his business.’ The word ⁂ _sep_, ‘turn,’ has the
different significations of the Latin ‘vices.’

In the later recensions this chapter is lengthened out by other
petitions. The deceased asks, among other things, to appear “before
thee, O Lord of the gods, to attain the region of _Maāt_, may I rise up
a living god, let me shine like the divine host which is in heaven, let
me be as one of you. Let my steps be lifted up in Cher-ābaut. Let me see
the ship[9] of the holy Sahu [Orion], traversing the sky; let me not be
prevented from seeing the lords of the Tuat [the Netherworld], smelling
the fragrance of the sacrificial offerings made to the divine host, and
sitting with them. Let the Cher-heb [the priestly ministrant] make
invocation over my coffin. Let me hear the prayers of propitiation. Let
the divine ship Neshemet advance for me, let not my soul and its
possessor suffer repulse.”

An invocation to Osiris follows.

“Hail to thee, Prince of Amenta, Osiris, lord of Nifura; grant that I
may advance in peace towards Amenta, and that the Lords of Tasert may
receive me and say to me, ‘Salutation! Salutation! in Peace!’ let them
make for me a seat by the Prince of the divine Powers, let the two
Chenemta goddesses [Isis and Nephthys] receive me, in presence of
Unneferu, the Victorious. Let me be a follower of Horus in Re-stau, and
of Osiris in Tattu. Let me assume all forms for the satisfaction of my
heart in every place that my Genius [_Ka_] wisheth.”

The following rubric is found as early as the XIXth dynasty in
connection with this chapter, but it seems to have originally been
attached to Chapter 72.

“If this discourse is learnt upon earth, or is written upon the coffin,
he (the deceased) may come forth upon every day that he pleaseth and
again enter his house without impediment. And there shall be given to
him bread and beer and flesh meat upon the table of Râ: he shall receive
allotment in the Fields of Aarru [the Elysian fields of Egyptian
mythology], and there shall be given to him there wheat and barley, for
he shall be flourishing as when he was upon earth.”


Chapter 1 is followed in M. Naville’s edition by another, which the
learned editor calls 1 B. This chapter is found in so very few copies
that the text cannot as yet be restored. The two texts published by M.
Naville differ widely from each other. It was known however down to the
Roman period, though not inserted into copies of the Book of the Dead.

It is called _Chapter of introducing the Mummy into the Tuat on the day
of burial_. The 124th chapter bears a similar title. The word here
translated mummy is probably not to be understood of the visible mummy,
but of the living personality which it enclosed. The chapter opens with
an invocation, “Hail to thee, who art in the sacred region of Amenta,
the Osiris, [the deceased] knows thee and thy name, defend him from
those Worms which are in Restau, who live upon the flesh of men and
swallow their blood.” The names of the Worms were given, but in
consequence of the gaps in the text they cannot now be recovered. The
chapter finished with prayers in which the deceased identifies himself
with Horus, who has taken possession of the throne which his father has
given him; he has taken possession of heaven, and inherited the earth,
and neither heaven nor earth shall be taken from him, for he is Râ, the
eldest of the gods. His mother suckles him and offers him her breast,
which is on the horizon at Dawn.

[Illustration: VIGNETTE TO CHAPTER IX.]

-----

Footnote 5:

  Sharpe, _E.I._, pl. 97.

  The papyrus _Da_ which is of the same period reads
  ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ in the title of Chapter 17,
  instead of ⁂⁂ ‘glory,’ ‘éclat.’ The ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂
  correspond by their name very closely with the _devas_ of Indian
  mythology, and the dead are called ⁂⁂⁂⁂ on the pious
  hypothesis of their having obtained ‘glory.’ The word has nothing to
  do with ‘intelligence.’ It is particularly applicable to the heavenly
  bodies, the sun, moon and stars--‘the glittering ones,’ and the
  horizon at sunrise ⁂ _ḫut_, and ⁂⁂⁂ ‘fire’ derive their
  names from their _éclat_.

Footnote 6:

  See _Denkm._ II, 71 _b_, 72 _a_, _b_, 101 _b_; _cf._ 98 _h_, 116 _c_,
  and III, 260 _c_.

Footnote 7:

  The evidence produced by W. Max Müller in behalf of this reading of
  the priestly name is quite convincing.

Footnote 8:

  The human head (with a beard) sometimes given to the bird, merely
  indicates the _aivine_ nature of the soul.

Footnote 9:

  This is one of the meanings of ⁂⁂⁂, but in this place it may
  simply mean ‘going round in a ship.’


                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER II.

       _Chapter for Coming forth by day and Living after death._


Oh thou Only One,(1.) who shinest from the Moon, let me come forth amid
that train(2.) of thine, at large,(3.) and let me be revealed(4.) as one
of those in glory.(5.)

And when the Tuat is opened to the gods, let _N_ come forth to do his
pleasure upon earth amid the Living.

                                 NOTES.

This chapter occurs in only two of the ancient MSS. collated by Naville:
_Ae_ and _Pf_. It is also found in the papyrus of Ani.

1. ⁂ ‘unicus,’ the Sole and Only One, is one of the many appellatives
of the Sun. He is here represented as shining _in_ or _from_ the Moon.
_Cf._ note on Chapter 132.

2. ⁂⁂⁂⁂, ‘multitude, throng, train,’ here put for the
‘heavenly host,’ the ἄκριτος ἄστρων ὄχλος (Euripid., _Fr._ 596), or the
Hebrew עבא.

Osiris is ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, ‘the leader of the host,’ Sharpe, I,
105.

3. ⁂⁂⁂⁂,⁂⁂⁂⁂ אל־מהוץ, foras, ‘forth, out of
doors, at large,’ in opposition to enclosure in the tomb.

4. ⁂⁂, explicare, ‘disclose, unfold, reveal, make clear.’

5. Or ‘among the Glorious ones,’ ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER III.

                       _Another chapter like it._


Oh Tmu, who proceedest from Ur-henhenu,(1.) who art resplendent as the
Lion-faced,(2.) and who strewest thy words to those who are before thee;

Here cometh the faithful _N_, from the band of those who do the bidding
of thy words.

O ye seamen of Râ at the gloaming of the day, let _N_ live after death,
like Râ daily.

_Here the helmsman_: As Râ is born from Yesterday, so he too is born
from Yesterday, and as every god exulteth in life, so shall _N_ exult
even as they exult in life.

I am Thoth as he goeth forth from the House of the Prince in
Heliopolis.(3.)

                                 NOTES.

The only ancient copy of this chapter is in the papyrus of Amen-neb
(_Ae_), and here it is imperfect.

1. A personification of the Nile, ⁂⁂⁂. The later texts read
⁂⁂⁂ ‘the great goddess in the Water.’

2. The later texts have ⁂⁂⁂⁂, implying the two lions Shu and
Tefnut. But the older texts have ⁂⁂⁂⁂, a single god, with a
lion’s face or form. The two notions, however, are found in combination
in the Pyramid texts of Unas (l. 558) and Teta (l. 332).

3. See note 8 on Chapter 1.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER IV.

 _Another Chapter, for travelling on the road which is above the earth._


It is I who travel on the Stream(1.) which divideth the divine Pair,(2.)
I am come, let there be given to me the lands of Osiris.

                                 NOTES.

This fourth chapter has not as yet been found in any of the papyri of
the best period.

1. ⁂⁂⁂⁂, literally ‘weeping,’ ‘flood of tears,’ hence
‘overflow, inundation, stream or canal.’ It is one of the names of the
Nile on earth and in heaven and of his personification as a god. See
Chapter 61, and _P.S.B.A._, XIII, p. 8 and 9.]

2. ⁂⁂⁂ or ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ are two divinities in opposition
or contrast, like Set and Horus (Chapter 17, 25) or the sister goddesses
named ⁂⁂⁂⁂ _Mertȧ_ (37, 1). Thoth is the umpire between Set
and Horus (Darkness and Light) and mediates between them, but he and Râ
(the Moon and Sun) are (Teta, l. 69) spoken of as the two Rehu gods
travelling over the sky.]

                  ------------------------------------




                               CHAPTER V.

  _Chapter whereby work may not be imposed [upon a person(1.)] in the
                             Netherworld._


Here is _N_. He saith, I am he who raiseth the hand which is motionless,
and I come forth at the hour.(2.) I am the living Soul,(3.) and there go
before me the longings(4.) of those who bring salutation.(5.)

                                 NOTES.

This chapter is found in several of the best MSS., but the text is
extremely corrupt, and must have become absolutely unintelligible. The
Turin text differs greatly from that of the older copies, and the
transposition of words clearly shows how little the transcribers
understood what they were writing. I follow chiefly the text of _Aa_,
the papyrus of Nebseni.

1. These words only occur in the later copies.

2. ⁂⁂⁂⁂ is the older reading, but ⁂⁂⁂ seems to be
the more correct.

3. The oldest text must have had simply the ideographic ⁂, _Ae_ gives
⁂⁂⁂ _Ba_, but _Pd_ has ⁂⁂⁂⁂ _Ḫnemu_. The ‘living
Soul’ is that of the Sun, whether he is called Râ or Osiris.

4. ‘Desires, wishes, loves,’ literally, ‘hearts.’

5. ⁂⁂⁂ signifies ‘salute,’ as in Chapter 12, 1, and 14, 1, and
⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂ (with various other forms) the ‘saluter,’ is the
name of the Ape who is seen in the vignettes of the papyri saluting the
rising of the sun. See M. Naville’s _Todtenbuch_, I, plates 21 and 22;
the Papyrus of Ani, plate 2; the _Todtenbuch_ of Lepsius, Chapters 16
and 126.

I do not know how far it is correct to illustrate this undoubted origin
of the Egyptian name for the Ape, as ‘the saluting one,’ by the
following extract of a letter to Cuvier from M. Duvaucelle, about the
Siamang apes in the neighbourhood of Bencoolen in Sumatra. “They
assemble in numerous troops ... and thus united, they salute the rising
and the setting sun with the most terrific cries, which may be heard at
the distance of many miles; and which, when near, stun, when they do not
frighten. This is the morning call of the mountain Malays, but to the
inhabitants of the town, who are unaccustomed to it, it is a most
insupportable annoyance.”

In this place of the Book of the Dead the sign ⁂ is a mere
determinative of the sound _aān_ with the notion of _salutation_, just
as the sign ⁂ is a determinative of the sound _ȧb_ with the notion of
_thirst_.

The ‘saluters’ of the rising sun are neither real apes nor men but the
“Spirits of the East” who, as we are told in an inscription of the tomb
of Rameses VI, “effect the rising of Râ by opening the door at each of
the four portals of the eastern horizon of heaven. They it is who light
him on both sides, and go forth in advance of him.... And when he arises
they turn into six cynocephali.”[10]

The Egyptian words in the later texts are ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ the alternative reading being
itself a proof that the difficulty of the text was already felt by some
Egyptian scribe.

But if the scribe had consulted the oldest texts accessible in his day,
he would probably have seen another way out. Our oldest MS., that of
Nebseni, reads, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂
_bes-kuȧ ȧbu ȧāā(n)u_, which signify literally, “antecedunt me corda
salutantium.” The word ⁂⁂⁂ _bes_ is a very common one in
pictures representing the introduction of a king or a god into a temple.
It is the technical term used in the Tablet of Canopus for the
inducting, by the king, of priests into their offices. The subject of
this verb is ⁂⁂⁂ _hearts_; an independent word, instead of
being the mere determinative of ⁂⁂⁂. The object of the verb is
the speaker—⁂⁂⁂—_kuȧ_, ‘me,’ as the papyrus _Pa_ reads, like
_Aa_. And it is easy to see how the later text, which is already found
in _Ax_, has been corrupted out of the older.

-----

Footnote 10:

  Champollion, _Notices_, tom. II, p. 640.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER VI.

 _Chapter whereby the funereal Statuettes may be made to do work for a
                      person in the Netherworld._


O Statuette(1.) there! Should I be called and appointed to do any of the
labours that are done in the Netherworld by a person according to his
abilities, lo! all obstacles have been beaten down for thee; be thou
counted for me at every moment, for planting the fields, for watering
the soil, for conveying the sands of east and west.

Here am I, whithersoever thou callest me.

                                 NOTE.

1. This chapter is inscribed on the funereal statuettes, of which
enormous quantities are found; sometimes by hundreds in the
neighbourhood of a single mummy. Much information on the subject, both
archæological and philological, will be found in Mariette’s _Catalogue
Général des Monuments d’Abydos_, p. 25 and following, and in M. Loret’s
articles “Les Statuettes funéraires du Musée de Boulaq,” published in
the _Recueil de Travaux_, tomes IV and V.

In the earlier texts ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂,
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂; in the later
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. The latter word being read _ušebti_, has very
naturally been considered as derived from ⁂⁂⁂⁂, in Coptic
ⲟⲩⲱϣⲃ, ‘to answer.’ For the statuette is addressed at the beginning of
the chapter, and it replies at the end. But there is no reason for
supposing that the earlier form had the same meaning.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER VII.

     _Chapter of passing through the chine of Apepi which is void._


Oh, One of Wax,(1.) who takest captive and seizest with violence, and
livest upon those who are motionless! Let me not become motionless
before thee, let me not be paralysed before thee, let not thy venoms
enter into my limbs, for my limbs are the limbs of Tmu.

And if thou wouldst not be paralysed, let me not be paralysed.

Let not thy languors enter these limbs of mine.

I am the One who presideth over the pole of Heaven, and the powers of
all the gods are my powers.

I am he, whose names are hidden, and whose abodes are mysterious for all
eternity.

It is I who proceed from Tmu, and I am safe and sound.(2.)

                                 NOTES.

Apepi is the personification of the storm-cloud and, as such, is the
enemy of Râ, by whom he is vanquished. As representing a natural
phenomenon of irregular occurrence, he is not deified like Sutu, the
Darkness of Night.

On comparing this chapter with the 99th, it would appear that the
occasion for reciting it is on the journey of the heavenly boat through
ridges of cloud, which are pictured as the coils of a great serpent, and
described as ⁂⁂ inanes, empty, void. In the papyrus of Nebket
(_Pe_) the vignette shows the deceased person transfixing the dragon.
The chapter itself was said over a wax figure of the demon.

1. These wax figures of gods and other personages were used not
only for ritual but for unlawful magical purposes. The Rollin
papyrus reports about a criminal condemned to death for magical
arts. He was charged with making ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ ‘gods of
wax,’ and some men “for the purpose of paralysing the limbs of men
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.” See Chabas, _Papyrus
Magique_, p. 170, and Devéria, _Pap. judiciaire de Turin_, p. 131.

2. The more recent texts omit this ending and substitute, “I know, I
know.” Some MSS. have both readings.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER VIII.

                 _Chapter of opening the Tuat by day._


The Hour(1.) discloseth what the head of Thoth keepeth close, who giveth
might to the Eye of Horus.(2.)

And I call upon the Eye of Horus which gleams as an ornament upon the
brow of Râ, the father of the gods.

I am that Osiris, the Lord of Amenta, and Osiris knoweth his day, and
that it is in his lot that he should end his being, and be no more.(3.)

I am Sutu, the father of the gods, the imperishable one.

Stay, Horus, for he is counted among the gods.

                                 NOTES.

1. Time.

2. See note on Chapter 17, 27. It must be sufficient here to say that
Thoth is a personification of the moon, and that the relations of solar
and lunar phenomena are the sources of a great deal of Egyptian
mythology.

3. This is one of the most difficult passages in the Book of the Dead,
but I do not see how it can be grammatically understood otherwise. It is
understood from the passage from Light to Darkness and the converse.

‘In his lot,’ literally ‘in him.’

‘End his being’: more strictly, ‘bring to an end his activity’;
⁂⁂⁂. ‘_Being_’ (though inevitable in a modern language) is much
too abstract a word for these ancient texts. ⁂ implies ‘motion,
activity,’ and ⁂ is not a simple negation, but implies ‘completion,
end’ (τελέω, τέλος), though not ‘cessation.’

Our _modern_ acceptation of the word ‘perfect’ is often wrongly applied
to ⁂. We should think rather of such phrases as ‘annum perficere,’
‘sole perfecto.’

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER IX.

                    _Chapter for opening the Tuat._


O Soul most mighty,(1.) here am I: I am come to thee that I may see
thee.

I open the Tuat that I may see my father Osiris and may drive away the
darkness.

I am he whom he loveth. I have come to see my father Osiris, to pierce
the heart of Sutu, and to perform all duties to my father Osiris.

I open all the paths in heaven and upon earth.

I am the son who loveth his father, and I am come as a mummied one,
glorious and well equipt.

Oh, all ye gods and goddesses, the path is made for me.

                                 NOTE.

1. ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ ‘Soul most mighty,’ is one of the principal
names of Osiris. The whole chapter is spoken in the person of Horus, the
son of Osiris.

                  ------------------------------------




                               CHAPTER X.

                _Chapter for coming forth victoriously._


I come forth victoriously against the adversaries.

I cleave the heaven, I open the horizon and I travel over the earth on
foot. There come forward to me the Glorious and the Great ones, for I am
furnished with numberless Words of Might.

I eat with my mouth, and I chew with my jaw; for, lo, I worship the god
who is Lord of the Tuat, and that is given to me which endureth amid
overthrow.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER XI.

   _Chapter for coming out against the adversary in the Netherworld._


Here is the Osiris _N_.

O Eater of his arm: away from his path!

I am Râ coming forth from the horizon against his adversary, who shall
not be delivered from me.

I have stretched out my hand, as the Lord of the Crown, and lifted my
feet.

I shall not be given up; my adversary shall fall before me; he hath been
given up to me and shall not be delivered from me.

I rise up like Horus, I sit down as Ptah, I am victorious as Thoth, and
powerful as Tmu: I walk upon my feet, I speak with my mouth, searching
for him who hath been given up to me; he shall not be delivered from me.

                                 NOTE.

There is unfortunately no early text of this chapter, which we have in a
very corrupt form, and can only restore conjecturally. The Eater of his
arm is evidently Darkness, which is destroyed by the Sun.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER XII.

  _Chapter for entering and for coming forth out of the Netherworld._


Salutation to thee, O Râ, who guardest the secrets of the gates(1.) over
this domain of Seb, and this Balance with which Râ raiseth up Maât (2.)
daily:

Here am I, who cleave open(3.) the earth, grant that I may come and
acquire advance in age.(4.)

                                 NOTES.

This chapter, like the next, occurs only in _Pa_ among the older MSS. It
comes twice in the Turin copy, being repeated as Chapter 120.

1. So _Pa_; the Turin copy has ‘the Tuat.’

2. In many places it is important to treat _Maât_ as a proper name.

3. ⁂⁂⁂⁂ or ⁂⁂⁂ , a word not confined to
agricultural operations. See note 20, p. 8.

4. As the sun, who is represented as an infant at dawn and as an aged
man at sunset.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER XIII.

          _Chapter for entering after coming out from Amenta._


I enter as a Hawk and come forth as a Bennu(1.) at Dawn.

Let the way be made for me that I may adore Râ at the fair Amenta, and
the locks(2.) of Osiris. I urge on the hounds of Horus.

Let the way be made for me that I may adore Osiris, the Lord of Life.

                                 NOTES.

This chapter, in the MSS. of which the Turin copy is the type, is
repeated as Chapter 121, with the following rubric:--

“Said over an ear-ring of the flower Ânch-amu, put upon the right ear of
the deceased person, with another ear-ring, put in fine linen, upon
which is written the name of _N_, on the day of burial.”

1. The Bennu is a bird of the Heron kind. He is very commonly but, I
think, erroneously identified with the Phoenix. The bird described by
Herodotus, II, 73, was in outline and size “very like an eagle,” which
no one could say of the Bennu. He appeared only once in five hundred
years, whereas the Bennu appeared every day. The fable as told by the
Greeks is utterly unsupported by any Egyptian authority known to us.

2. This passage is, unfortunately, both in the ancient and the recent
forms, corrupt.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER XIV.

 _Chapter for removing displeasure from the heart of the god against the
                            deceased person._


Hail to thee, oh god who sendest forth(1.) the Moment, who presidest
over all the Secret things(2.), and protectest the utterance of my
words.

Here(3.) is a god displeased against me; let wrong be overwhelmed and
let it fall upon the hands of the Lord of Law. Remove(4.) the
impediments which are in me and the evil and the darkness(5.), oh Lord
of Law, and let that god be reconciled to me, removing that which
detaineth me from thee.

Oh, lord of offerings in Kenu(6.), let me offer to thee the propitiary
offering by which thou livest, and let me live by it and be reconciled.

Let all the displeasure which is in thy heart against me be removed.

                                 NOTES.

There is a very great difference between the earlier and the later texts
of this chapter. Former translators, having chiefly the Turin text
before them, have understood the title of the chapter as intended “to
remove the impurities from the heart of the deceased person.” The Turin
text of the chapter is really unintelligible, and even in the earlier
texts certain passages are so corrupt as to defy translation.

1. ⁂⁂⁂⁂ like the Latin ‘mittere’ has the sense of “let go,
give free course, set at liberty.”

2. ⁂⁂⁂, the _secrets_, here as elsewhere in the funereal texts,
are those of the tomb and of the world beyond the grave.

3. The older texts have ⁂⁂, the later, ⁂.

4. The Lord of Law is in the singular, but the imperative ‘remove’ is in
the plural.

5. The word ⁂⁂ was a puzzle to the oldest transcribers.
It is susceptible of different meanings. The Turin text
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ ‘the god is joined with Law,’ which is
supported by some of the older papyri, is intelligible in itself, but
not in this context. I have understood ⁂⁂⁂⁂, coming as it
does after ⁂⁂⁂, in the sense of ⁂⁂⁂⁂ ‘deep
darkness.’

6. The MSS. differ hopelessly on this proper name.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER XV.

                              HYMN I(1.).

      _Adored be Râ, when he riseth up from the eastern horizon of
               Heaven; they who accompany him extol him._

Here is the Osiris _N_, the Victorious, and he saith:--

O thou radiant Orb, who arisest each day from the Horizon, shine thou
upon the face of the Osiris _N_ who adoreth thee at dawn, and
propitiateth thee at the gloaming.

Let the soul of _N_ come forth with thee into heaven, let him journey in
the Mââtit boat and finish his course in the Sektit boat(2.) till he
reach in heaven unto the Stars which set(3.).

He saith, as he invoketh his Lord, the Eternal one:--

Hail to thee, Horus of the Two Horizons(4.), who art Chepera
Self-originating(5.); Beautiful is thy rising up from the horizon,
enlightening the two Earths with thy rays. All the gods are in
exultation when they see thee the King of Heaven, with the Nebt
Unnut[11] established upon thy head (and the diadem of the South and the
diadem of the North upon thy brow) which maketh her abode in front of
thee.

Thoth abideth at the prow of thy bark that he may destroy all thine
adversaries.

They who dwell in the Tuat are coming forth to meet thy Majesty, and to
gaze upon that beautiful semblance of thine.

And I too come to thee that I may be with thee to see thine Orb each
day; let me not be detained, let me not be repulsed.

Let my limbs be renewed by the contemplation of thy glories, like all
thy servants, for I am one of those who honoured thee upon earth.

Let me reach the Land of Ages, let me gain the Land of Eternity; for
thou, my Lord, hast destined them for me.

The Osiris _N_; he saith:--

Hail to thee who risest up from the Horizon as Râ in union with Maāt;
thou dost traverse heaven in peace and all men see thee as thou goest
forward. And after being concealed from them thou presentest thyself at
the dawn of each day.

Brisk is the bark under thy Majesty.

Thy rays are upon men’s faces; the golden glories they cannot be told:
not to be described are thy beams.

The Lands of the gods, the colours of Punit(6.) are seen in them; that
men may form an estimate of that which is hidden from their faces.

Alone art thou when thy form riseth up upon the Sky; let me advance as
thou advancest, like thy Majesty, without a pause, O Râ, whom none can
outstrip.

A mighty march is thine; Leagues by millions, and hundreds of thousands,
in a small moment thou hast travelled them, and thou goest to rest.

Thou completest the hours of the Night, according as thou hast measured
them out. And when thou hast completed them according to thy rule, day
dawneth.

Thou presentest thyself at thy place as Râ, as thou risest from the
Horizon.

The Osiris _N_, he saith, as he adoreth thee when thou shinest; He saith
to thee when thou risest up at dawn, as he exalteth thine appearance;

Thou comest forth, most glorious one, fashioning and forming thy limbs,
giving birth to them without any labour, as Râ rising in heaven.

Grant that I may attain to the Heaven of eternity and the abode of thy
servants; let me be united with the venerable and mighty Chu[12] of the
Netherworld; let me come forth with them to see thy glories, as thou
shinest at the gloaming, when thy mother Nut(7.) enfoldeth thee.

And when thou turnest thy face to the West, mine hands are in adoration
to thy setting as one who liveth;[13] for it is thou who hast created
Eternity.

I have set thee in my heart unceasingly, who art more mighty than all
the gods.

The Osiris _N_, he saith:--

Adoration to thee, who arisest out of the Golden, and givest light to
the earth on the day of thy birth. Thy mother bringeth thee forth upon
her hands, that thou mayest give light to the whole circumference which
the Solar Orb enlighteneth.

Mighty Enlightener, who risest up in the Sky and raisest up the tribes
of men by thy Stream, and givest holiday to all districts, towns and
temples; and raising food, nourishment and dainties.

Most Mighty one, master of masters, who defendest every abode of thine
against wrong, Most Glorious one in thine Evening Bark, Most Illustrious
in thy Morning Bark.

Glorify thou the Osiris _N_ in the Netherworld, grant that he may come
into Amenta without defect and free from wrong, and set him among the
faithful and venerable ones.

Let him be united with the souls in the Netherworld, let him sail about
in the country of Aarru[14] after a joyful journey.

Here is the Osiris _N_.

Come forth into Heaven, sail across the firmament and enter into
brotherhood with the Stars, let salutation be made to thee in the Bark,
let invocation be made to thee in the Morning Bark. Contemplate Râ
within his Ark and do thou propitiate his Orb daily. See the Ant fish in
its birth from the emerald stream, and see the Abtu fish and its
rotations.(8.)

And let the offender[15] fall prostrate, when he meditates destruction
for me, by blows upon his back-bone.

Râ springs forth with a fair wind; the Evening Bark speeds on and
reaches the Haven; the crew of Râ are in exultation when they look upon
him; the Mistress of Life, her heart is delighted at the overthrow of
the adversary of her Lord.

See thou Horus at the Look-out of the ship,(9.) and at his sides Thoth
and Maāt. All the gods are in exultation when they behold Râ coming in
peace to give new life to the hearts of the Chu, and here is the Osiris
_N_ along with them.

                             [LITANY.](10.)

        _Adored be Râ, as he setteth in the Land of Life._(11.)

 Hail to thee, who hast come as Tmu, and hast been the creator of the
    cycle of the gods,(12.)
 Hail to thee, who hast come as the Soul of Souls, August one in Amenta,
 Hail to thee, who art above the gods and who lightenest up the Tuat with
    thy glories,
 Hail to thee, who comest in splendour, and goest round in thine Orb,
 Hail to thee, who art mightier than the gods, who art crowned in Heaven
    and King in the Tuat,
 Hail to thee, who openest the Tuat and disposest of all its doors,

 Hail to thee, supreme among the gods, and Weigher of Words in the
    Netherworld.
 Hail to thee, who art in thy Nest, and stirrest the Tuat with thy glory,
 Hail to thee, the Great, the Mighty, whose enemies are laid prostrate at
    their blocks,
 Hail to thee, who slaughterest the Sebau and annihilatest Âpepi,

[Each invocation of this Litany is followed by]

Give thou delicious breezes of the north wind to the Osiris _N_.

Horus openeth; the Great, the Mighty, who divideth the earths, the great
one who resteth in the Mountain of the West, and lighteneth up the Tuat
with his glories and the Souls in their hidden abode, by shining into
their sepulchres.

By hurling harm against the foe thou hast utterly destroyed all the
adversaries of the Osiris _N_.

                             HYMN II.(13.)

The Osiris _N_; he saith when he adoreth Râ, the Horus of the Two
Horizons, when setting in the Land of Life.

Adoration to thee, O Râ; Adoration to thee, O Tmu, at thy coming in thy
beauty, in thy manifestation, in thy mastery.

Thou sailest over the Heaven, thou travellest over earth and in
splendour thou reachest the zenith; the two divisions of Heaven are in
obeisance to thee, and yield adoration to thee.

All the gods of Amenta are in exultation at thy glory. They whose abodes
are hidden adore thee, and the Great Ones make offerings to thee, who
for thee have created the soil of earth.(14.)

They who are on the Horizon convey thee, and they who are in the Evening
Bark transport thee, and they say--Adoration at the approach of thy
Majesty, Come, Come, approach in peace, Oh to thee, Welcome, Lord of
Heaven, King of Akerta.

Thy mother Isis(15.) embraceth thee, seeing in thee her son, as the Lord
of Terror, the All-Powerful, as he setteth in the Land of Life at night.

Thy father Tatunen(16.) carrieth thee, and his arms are stretched out
behind thee, and that which hath taken place is made last upon earth.

Wake up from thy rest, thine abode is in Manu.

Let me be entrusted to the fidelity which is yielded to Osiris.

Come, O Râ, Tmu, be thou adored. Do thy will daily. Grant success in
presence of the cycle of the mighty gods.

Beautiful art thou, O Râ, in thine Horizon of the West; O Lord of Law,
in the midst of the Horizon.

Very terrible art thou, rich art thou in attributes, and great is thy
love to those who dwell in the Tuat.

_To be said, when Râ sets in the Land of Life; with hands bent
downward._(17.)

                             HYMN III.(18.)

         _Adoration to Tmu as he setteth in the Land of Life._

The Osiris _N_; he saith:--

Adoration to Tmu as he setteth in the Land of Life.

The Osiris _N_; he saith, adoring Tmu, when setting in the Land of Life
and shedding his rays on the Tuat;

Hail to thee setting in the Land of Life, O Father of the gods, thou art
united to thy mother in Manu. Her two hands receive thee daily. Thy
Majesty hath part in the house of Sokaru. Exult thou because the doors
are opened of the Horizon, at thy setting in the Mountain of the West.

Thy rays, they run over the earth to enlighten the dwellers in Amenta.
Those who are in the Tuat worship thee with loud acclaim, and cherish
hope when they see thee daily.

Thou grantest to the gods to sit upon the earth; to those, namely, who
follow thee and come in thy train.

O august Soul, who begettest the gods, and dost invest them with thine
attributes; the Unknowable, the Ancient One, the Mighty in thy mystery.

Be thy fair face propitious to the Osiris _N_, oh Chepera, Father of the
gods(19.).

Freedom for ever from perdition is derived through this Book, and upon
it I take my firm stand.

He hath written it who spake it, and his heart resteth on the reward.

Let there be given me armfuls of bread and drink, and let me be
accompanied by this Book after my life.

                                 NOTES.

The fifteenth chapter as it stands in the later recension (represented
by the Turin _Todtenbuch_) is of very recent origin. It is in fact a
collection of texts originally independent of each other; (1) a hymn to
Râ at his rising, (2) a litany, (3) a hymn to Râ at his setting, (4) a
hymn to Tmu at his setting, followed by a statement respecting the
spiritual importance of the document.

Of the last hymn there are no copies of ancient date, but the other
three compositions are found more or less perfect as far back as the
XIXth dynasty. The discrepancies, however, between the ancient texts
furnish so much evidence of free composition on the part of the scribes,
that it is impossible to suppose that they had before them documents
recognised as sacred and canonical. M. Naville has found it necessary to
publish four different forms of the hymn to the rising, and three of the
hymn to the setting sun. The ideas and expressions throughout these
hymns are current in the religious texts of the XVIIIth and XIXth
dynasties.

In the translation here given I have followed the _form_ adopted by the
later recension, correcting the text when necessary by the copies
written in the better periods.

1. The text of the Papyrus of Ani has been taken as the basis of the
translation of HYMN I. It is the only ancient text which gives the hymn
in the form subsequently acknowledged as canonical.

2. The sun was represented from the earliest period, as we may see in
the pyramid texts, as performing his celestial journey in a boat, which
during the morning was called the _Māāṭit_ ⁂⁂⁂ and in the
evening the _Sektit_ ⁂⁂.

3. The stars which _set_ were called the
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _ȧḫmiu ureṭu_. The stars which
never set, but are always above the horizon were called
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _ȧḫmiu seku_. The word _ȧḫmiu_ has
often been taken for a mere negative, but it occurs by itself with the
sign of _stars_ as a determinative ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂.
And the whole term is written ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ (_Denkm._ III.
271_d_ _twice_).

As one of the meanings of ⁂ _ḫem_ is _minuere_, and as the ordinary
meaning of the Demotic ⁂⁂⁂ is “small,” like the Coptic
ϣⲟⲙ = λεπτὸς, it is not improbable that the stars received this
appellation on account of their tiny size as compared with the Sun and
Moon. They were what Horace called the “ignes _minores_.”

The Sun and Moon, as we all know, are called in Gen. i, 16, the “Two
Great Lights.”

4. Both the Eastern and the Western horizon are mentioned in this
chapter, but “Horus of the Two Horizons,” has no reference to this
distinction. Whatever the Sun passes through or over is always conceived
as double. The _Two Earths_ imply simply the Earth as divided by the
passage of the Sun above it. It is to M. Grébaut that we are indebted
for the discovery of this important key to many Egyptian expressions.

5. ⁂ _ḫeper_, like the German _Werden_, has primarily the sense of
_turning_, hence of _becoming_. It never has the sense of _creating_.
⁂⁂ _ḫeper t’esef_ is the equivalent of the Greek αὐτογενής, like
that word is sometimes used for spontaneous productions of the mineral
kingdom, as salt or natron as contrasted with artificial products of the
same nature. It cannot be used for plants, as they have an origin in
something external to themselves.

6. _The Land of the Gods_ and _Punit_ are the countries lying east of
Egypt. When it is said that gods ‘come from Punit,’ it is not meant by
this that they are of Arabian origin, but simply that Sun, Moon, and
Stars, and Daylight rise in the East. “Ex oriente Lux.”

7. In many places the divine name Nut has for determinative the sign
⁂. Is this an oversight on the part of the scribe, or is it one more
proof that the Egyptians certainly believed in a sky below the horizon?
If so, I have never seen it misplaced.

8. The Ant and the Abṭu are sometimes represented by the side of the
solar bark. From the egg of the Abṭu there rises the great Cat, the Sun.
It is, as M. Loret has proved, the _Tortoise_ of the Nile. As
⁂⁂⁂ _ȧbṭu_, ‘the _month_,’ is phonetically homonymous with
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _ȧbṭu_, the Tortoise, and that the latter is
characterised by ⁂, ⁂, ‘its rotation, revolving or turning,’ the
word _ȧbṭu_, whether applied to ‘month’ or ‘tortoise’ clearly signifies
‘the revolving one.’ Our modern words Tortoise, Tortue, Tortuga, rather
express the turning or twisting of the creature’s feet. In some texts,
_e.g._, the inscriptions of Amenhotep, the son of Hapu, Mariette,
_Karnak_, pl. 36, line 22, and at the beginning of the Ani Papyrus, the
word is written ⁂⁂⁂ _abtu_. In the later part of the Ani
Papyrus it is written with the initial ⁂⁂.

9. The Look-out of the ship, in Egyptian ⁂⁂⁂, or more fully
⁂⁂⁂⁂ _nefrit_, is written ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ in the
Papyrus of Ani. This interesting variant is of extreme value. It not
only explains a word, the very existence of which has been called in
question, but tells us the Egyptian name for that seat of Horus at the
prow of the Solar Bark about which I wrote a note in _Proc. Soc. Bib.
Arch._ of Nov. 3, 1891. See the plates attached to the note, and the
corresponding vignettes in _Todtenbuch_, Pl. VI and IX.

10. The Litany here translated is that of the Turin _Todtenbuch_. It is
found, but in a very mutilated condition, in the Papyrus of Nechtuamon
at Berlin (_Ba_), a manuscript of the XIXth dynasty.

Another Litany, preceding HYMN I, is found in the Papyrus of Ani. It is
addressed to “Osiris, the everlasting Lord, Unneferu, Horus of the Two
Horizons, of many forms and mighty of attributes. Ptah Sakru, Tmu in
Heliopolis, Lord of the Unseen World, who hath built up Memphis and its
gods.”

“Hail to thee, Chabasu[16] in Heliopolis, Hammemit in Cher-âbau, and
  Unta[17] more potent than the unseen gods in Heliopolis.

  Hail to thee, An in An ... Horus in the Two Horizons, who extendeth
  his steps and traverseth the Heaven; he is Horchuta;

Hail to thee, eternal Soul, Soul which is in Tattu, Unneferu, Son of
  Nut; he is Lord of Acherta;

Hail to thee, as thou reignest in Tattu, the royal crown is fixed upon
  thy brow. Thou art the Only One, the author of his own attributes,
  thou restest in Tattu;

Hail to thee, Lord of Heracleopolis, for whom the Bark of Sokru is
  placed upon its sledge; who repellest the Sebau, the doers of wrong;
  and who puttest the _Ut’at_ into its place;

Hail to thee, Potent One, at thine appointed moment, Most Mighty One,
  Prince of An-arr-ef, Eternal Lord, author of eternity, Thou art the
  Lord of Suten-henen;

Hail to thee, who restest upon Maāt; Thou art the Lord of Abydos, thy
  limbs reach to Ta-tsert; Thou art he who abominatest wrong;

Hail to thee, in the midst of thy Bark, who bringest the Nile from his
  fountain; upon whose dead body the light shineth; he is the One who is
  in Nechen;

Hail to thee, author of the gods, King of North and South, Osiris, the
  triumphant one, possessing the entire universe in his beneficent
  alternations; He is the Lord of the Universe;

Grant me passage in peace. I am righteous, I speak not falsehood
  knowingly, I am not guilty of duplicity.”

11. ⁂⁂⁂ ‘the Land of Life,’ one of the names given to the realm
of Osiris after death, is not, as far as I can discover, mentioned
anywhere in the earlier MSS. of the Book of the Dead.

Instead of “resting in the Land of Life,” the older texts have
⁂⁂⁂ ‘in Amenta’ or ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ ‘in life in
Amenta,’ or as ‘one living, in Amenta.’

12. ⁂⁂. The word ⁂⁂ _pat_ implies going _round_ like a wheel
or in a circle; ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ ‘going round on high with
the Sun.’ Hence the use of it as synonymous with ⁂, in the
expressions ⁂⁂ =⁂ ‘never’ and ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ = ⁂⁂
‘the first time, the beginning of time, _prima vice_.’ A sacrificial
cake is called ⁂⁂⁂ (_Denkm._, II, 28) on account of its shape,
like the Latin _rotundula_, also written ⁂⁂⁂.

And, like the Greek κύκλος, the word comes to signify a circle of
persons. This circle is not necessarily of gods. The Bremner Papyrus in
the British Museum (14, line 8), says an _apage_ not only to Âpepi, who
was no god, and to his soul and body, and ghost and shadow and children,
and to his kith and kin, but, also to his ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, that is
all associated with him, “ceux de son _entourage_.”

That ⁂⁂ should express the ‘feast of the New Moon’ is only
natural, though Lepsius has pointed out serious difficulties on the
subject.

But ⁂ also expresses the number nine. Whence in this relation arises
the Egyptian conception of the number nine? Is it the _round_ (we should
say the ‘square’) number, three times three? It certainly is merely a
round number in many instances, but what is still more certain is that
the same expression meaning ‘circle of gods’ and ‘nine gods,’ the circle
was supposed to consist of nine gods, and was enlarged to companies of
eighteen or twenty-seven. It is, I am sure, perfectly idle work to look
for more profound reasons for the theory of the ‘Ennead.’[18] _Every_
god of importance had his ⁂⁂⁂,[19] and the best theory that has
ever been given is that given at the beginning of Chapter 17.

13. The Turin text seems better adapted for the basis of a translation
of HYMN II than the older papyri. These have been used for checking the
later text whenever possible.

14. A difficult passage, but the readings are unanimous. What is ⁂?
Brugsch translates it “the Talisman of the Earth,” and Pierret “le salut
de la terre.” No objection can be raised against the truth of either of
these meanings taken by itself. But we have to look at the entire
context. The expression literally signifies “the back of the earth.” In
Latin we say _sinus_, _gremium_ and _viscera terrae_. The Egyptians
themselves talk of the back of Seb, ⁂⁂⁂, out of which the
plants grow, and in a place quoted by Duemichen (_Zeitschrift_, 1871, p.
92, note) ⁂⁂ _ta_ the _Earth_, is substituted for Seb. I believe
then that ⁂ is best translated by _Soil of the Earth_.

15. Thy mother Isis. So _Ba_. The Turin text has Nut, which is
inconsistent with what follows.

16. _La_ gives Tatunen; _Af_, Tunen; the Turin recension Tanen, names
belonging to the god also called Ptah, Sokru and Osiris. See the
inscriptions in Mariette’s _Abydos_, I, pl. 16, 6, on the Tat figures.

Horus, the son of Osiris and Isis, seems to be here addressed.

17. This rubric does not occur in the older MSS.

18. This hymn has not yet been found in the older MSS. A text carefully
corrected from the papyri of the Louvre will be found in M. Lefébure’s
_Traduction comparée des Hymnes au Soleil composant le XV^e chapitre du
Ritual Funéraire Egyptien_. Paris, 1868.

19. ‘Chepera, father of the gods.’ Expressions like this are liable to
be misunderstood by superficial readers. They are not meant to imply
that ‘father of the gods’ was the special attribute of Chepera. ‘Father
of the gods’ is predicated in Chapter 8 of Sutu, and it is predicated
elsewhere of many other divinities. As in mathematics _any_ point in
space may be conceived as the origin of a given line or surface, so in
Egyptian mythology any god may be rightly called the father of the gods.
And for the same reason. The Day precedes the Night, but not more truly
than Night precedes, or in mythological language _gives birth to_ Day.
But we may begin at Daybreak, or at Noon, or at Sunset, or with the Sun
or the Moon, or with the rising of the Nile or any other natural
phenomenon which obeys an evidently permanent fixed Law.

-----

Footnote 11:

  One of the names of the Uræus on the royal crown.

Footnote 12:

  ‘The Glorious ones’; see Note 1 on Chapter I.

Footnote 13:

  See note 11.

Footnote 14:

  An abode of bliss (like the Elysian fields) frequently mentioned and
  described in the Book of the Dead.

Footnote 15:

  The dragon Âpepi.

Footnote 16:

  Both _Chabasu_ and _Hammemit_ have the sign of the plural, which may
  arise from the omission of _who art above_ before the first of these
  words. Unfortunately we have no other copy to check the readings. But
  it is certain that the sign of plurality is often affixed to words
  which though in plural form (like the Latin _moenia_, _literae_,
  _tenebrae_) have a singular meaning. _Chabasu_ means a _lamp_, and the
  stars, especially the decans, were called by this appellation.
  _Hammemit_ is the name given to those yet unborn.

Footnote 17:

  ⁂⁂⁂_Un-tȧ_, signifies the god who assumes the face or form of
  a _Hare_ ⁂, just as _Mau-tȧ_ signifies the god with the face or
  form of a Cat, _Tehuta_, the god with the head or form of an Ibis.

Footnote 18:

  I am deeply grieved that in my conversation and correspondence with
  Goodwin (see my _Miscellaneous Notes on Egyptian Philology_, p. 15), I
  hit upon ‘Ennead’ as a translation of ⁂. Goodwin took it up, and
  it has since been productive of much mischief. The word in itself
  (like Triad), is perfectly innocent and correct, yet every word has
  its ‘cycle’ of associations, and some of them lead the unwary astray.
  I had just been lecturing on Plotinus when Goodwin asked me for the
  word.

Footnote 19:

  The _four_ children of Horus are called (_Tempelins._, I, 41, 1)
  ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

PLATE IV.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.
                              CHAPTER XVI.

[Illustration:

  =A.=--THE RISING SUN.

  Papyrus, Leyden Museum, II.
]

                             --------------

             _See_ NAVILLE’s “Book of the Dead,” I, Pl. 21.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE V.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

                              CHAPTER XVI.

[Illustration:

  =B.=--THE SETTING SUN.

  Papyrus, Leyden Museum.
]

                             --------------

             _See_ NAVILLE's “Book of the Dead,” I, Pl. 22.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER XVI.

                                 NOTE.

When Lepsius divided the _Todtenbuch_ into 165 chapters, that portion of
it which was numbered as Chapter 16, was in fact merely the Vignette of
Chapter 15.

It has been thought well to publish with this translation the Vignettes
from the great Papyrus _La_ of Leyden, representing _a_, the Rising; and
_b_, the Setting Sun. (_See plates._)

In _a_ the Sun is represented as rising into Heaven, saluted by the six
Cynocephalous Apes. He is also saluted by two goddesses kneeling. In the
Papyrus of Hunefer these goddesses say, “I am thy sister Isis,” “I am
thy sister Nephthys.” The _Tat_ ⁂ which is between them is a symbol
_both_ of Osiris and of the East, and in _Ba_ is replaced by the sign
⁂. In the later periods the Dawn was represented by the sign ⁂
consisting of the Sun rising out of the East, between Isis and Nephthys.
The sign of Life ⁂ _ānḫ_ (which primarily means _rise up_) rises out
of the _Tat_, and with hands proceeding from it raises up the Sun.

In _b_ the central object is the Sun setting in the West ⁂. He is
saluted by three hawk-headed and by three jackal-headed divinities, the
Spirits of Pu and of Nechen. Below this scene the Sun of Yesterday and
the Sun of To-day in lion forms are saluted by Isis and Nephthys.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER XVII.

 _Chapter whereby one cometh forth by day out of the Netherworld. Let the
                             words be said_:


=I am he who closeth and he who openeth, and I am but One.=(1.)

I am Râ at his first appearance.

I am the great god, self-produced;

His Names together compose the cycle of the gods;

Resistless is he among the gods.(2.)

I, who am Osiris, am Yesterday and the kinsman of the Morrow.(3.)

A scene of strife arose among the gods when I gave the command.(4.)

=Amenta is the scene of strife among the gods.=

I know the name of the great god who is here.

=Herald[20] of Râ is his name.=

I am the great Heron who is in Heliopolis, who presideth over the
account of whatsoever is and of that which cometh into being.(5.)

=Who is that? It is Osiris who presideth over the account of all that is
and all that cometh into being, that is Endless Time and Eternity.
Endless Time is Day and Eternity is Night.=

I am Amsu in his manifestations; there have been given to me the Two
Feathers upon my head.(6.)

=Who is that, and what are his Feathers? It is Horus, the avenger of his
father, and the Two Feathers are the Uræi upon the forehead of his
father Tmu.=(7.)

I have alighted upon my Land, and I come from my own Place.

=What is that? It is the Horizon of my father Tmu.=

All defects are done away, all deficiencies are removed, and all that
was wrong in me is cast forth.

I am purified at the two great and mighty Lakes at Sutenhunen, which
purify the offerings which living men present to the great god who is
there(8.).

=Who is that? It is Râ himself.=

=Which are the two great and mighty Lakes? The Lake of Natron and the
Lake of Māāt=(9.).

=I advance over the roads, which I know, and my face is on the Land of
Māāt.=

=What is that? The road upon which father Tmu advanceth, when he goeth
to the Field of Aarru, approaching to the land of Spirits in Heaven.=

I come forth through the T’eser gate.

=What is that? This gate of the gods is Haukar. It is the gate and the
two doors and openings, through which father Tmu issueth to the Eastern
Horizon of Heaven.=(10.)

O ye who have gone before! Let me grasp your hands, me who become one of
you.

=Who are they? Those who have gone before are Hu and Sau. May I be with
their father Tmu, throughout the course of each day.=(11.)

I make full the Eye when it waxeth dim on the day of battle between the
two Opponents.(12.)

=What is that? The battle of the two Opponents is the day upon which
Horus fighteth with Sut, when he flingeth his filth upon the face of
Horus, and when Horus seizeth upon the genitals of Sut, for it is Horus
who doeth this with his own fingers.=

I lift up the hairy net from the Eye at the period of its distress.(13.)

=What is that? The right Eye of Râ in the period of its distress when he
giveth it free course, and it is Thoth who lifteth up the net from it.=

I see Râ, when he is born from Yesterday, at the dugs of the Mehurit
cows?(14.) His course is my course, and conversely mine is his.

=What is that? Râ and his births from Yesterday at the dugs of the
Mehurit cows? It is the figure of the Eye of Râ, at his daily birth. And
Mehurit is the Eye.=

I am one of those who are in the train of Horus.

=What is that--‘one of those in the train of Horus’? Said with reference
to whom his Lord loveth.=

Hail, ye possessors of Māāt, divine Powers attached to Osiris, who deal
destruction to falsehood, ye who are in the train of Hotepeschaus, grant
me that I may come to you. Do ye away the wrong which is me, as ye have
done to the Seven Glorious ones, who follow after the Coffined one, and
whose places Anubis hath fixed on that day of ‘Come thou hither’!

=Hotepeschaus is the divine Flame which is assigned to Osiris for
burning the souls of his adversaries. I know the names of the Seven
Glorious ones who follow the Coffined one, and whose places Anubis hath
fixed on the day of ‘Come thou hither.’ The leader of this divine
company,=

‘An-ar-ef, the Great’ is his name; 2, Kat-kat; 3, the Burning Bull, who
liveth in his fire; 4, the Red-eyed one in the House of Gauze; 5,
Fieryface which turneth backwards; 6, Dark Face in its hour; 7, Seer in
the Night.(15.)

I am he whose Soul resideth in a pair of gods.

=It is Osiris, as he cometh to Tattu, and there findeth the soul of Râ;
each embraceth the other, and becometh Two Souls.=

=The pair of gods are Horus, the Avenger of his Father, and Horus, the
Prince of the City of Blindness.=

I am the great Cat, who frequenteth the Persea tree in Heliopolis, on
that night of battle wherein is effected the defeat of the Sebau, and
that day upon which the adversaries of the Inviolate god(16.) are
exterminated.

=Who is that great Cat? It is Râ himself. For Sau said, He is the
likeness (Maȧu) of that which he hath created, and his name became that
of Cat (Maȧu).=(17.)

=The night of conflict is the defeat of the children of Failure at
Elephantine. There was conflict in the entire universe, in heaven and
upon the earth.=

=He who frequenteth the Persea tree is he who regulateth the children of
Failure, and that which they do.=

O Râ, in thine Egg, who risest up in thine orb, and shinest from thine
Horizon, and swimmest over the firmament without a peer, and sailest
over the sky; whose mouth sendeth forth breezes of flame, lightening up
the Two Earths with thy glories, do thou deliver _N_ from that god whose
attributes are hidden, whose eyebrows are as the arms of the Balance
upon that day when outrage is brought to account, and each wrong is tied
up to its separate block of settlement.

=The god whose eyebrows are as the arms of the Balance is “he who
lifteth up his arm.”=[21]

Deliver me from those Wardens of the Passages with hurtful fingers,
attendant upon Osiris.

=The Wardens of Osiris are the Powers who keep off the forces of the
adversaries of Râ.=

May your knives not get hold of me; may I not fall into your shambles,
for I know your names; my course upon earth is with Râ and my fair goal
is with Osiris. Let not your offerings be in my disfavour, oh ye gods
upon your altars! I am one of those who follow the Master, a keeper of
the writ of Chepera.

I fly like a Hawk, I cackle like the _Smen_-Goose, I move eternally like
Nehebkau.(18.)

Oh Tmu who art in the Great Dwelling, Sovereign of all the gods, deliver
me from that god who liveth upon the damned; whose face is that of a
hound, but whose skin is that of a man; at that angle of the pool of
fire; devouring shades, digesting human hearts and voiding ordure. One
seeth him not.

=This god whose face is that of a hound and whose skin[22] is that of a
man: Eternal Devourer is his name.=(19.)

Oh Fearful one, who art over the Two Earths, Red god who orderest the
block of execution; to whom is given the Double Crown and Enjoyment as
Prince of Sutenhunen.

=It is Osiris to whom was ordained the Leadership among the gods, upon
that day when the Two Earths were united before the Inviolate god.=

=The junction of the Two Earths is the head of the coffin of Osiris
whose father is Râ=[23] =the beneficent Soul in Sutenhunen, the giver of
food and the destroyer of wrong, who hath determined the paths of
eternity.=

=It is Râ himself.=

Deliver me from that god who seizeth upon souls, who consumeth all filth
and corruption in the darkness or in the light: all those who fear him
are in powerless condition.

=This god is Sut.=

Oh Chepera, who are in the midst of thy bark and whose body is the cycle
of the gods for ever; deliver me from those inquisitorial Wardens to
whom the Inviolate god, of Glorious Attributes, hath given guard over
his adversaries, and the infliction of slaughter in the place of
annihilation, from whose guard there is no escape. May I not fall under
your knives, may I not sit within your dungeons, may I not come to your
places of extermination, may I not fall into your pits; may there be
done to me none of those things which the gods abominate; for I have
passed through the place of purification in the middle of the Meskat,
for which are given the Mesit and the Tehenit cakes in Tanenit.

=The Meskat is the place of scourging in Sutenhunen, the Tehenit is the
Eye of Horus.... Tanenit is the resting place of Osiris.=(20.)

Tmu buildeth thy dwelling, the Lion-faced god layeth the foundation of
thy house, as he goeth his round. Horus offereth purification and Sut
giveth might, and conversely.

I have come upon this earth and with my two feet taken possession. I am
Tmu and I come from my own Place.

Back, oh Lion with dazzling mouth, and with head bent forwards,
retreating before me and my might.

I am Isis and thou findest me as I drop upon my face the hair which
falleth loosely on my brow.

I was conceived by Isis and begotten by Nephthys. Isis destroyeth what
in me is wrong, and Nephthys loppeth off that which is rebellious.

Dread cometh in my train and Might is in my hands. Numberless are the
hands who cling fast to me. The dead ones and the living come to me. I
defeat the clients of mine adversaries, and spoil those whose hands are
darkened.

I have made an agreeable alliance. I have created the inhabitants of
Cher-âbat and those of Heliopolis.(21.) And every god is in fear before
the Terrible, the Almighty one.

I avenge every god against his oppressor, at whom I shoot my arrows when
he appeareth.

I live according to my will.

I am Uat’it, the Fiery one.(22.)

And woe to them who mount up against me!

What is this? “Of unknown attributes, which Hemen(23.) hath given” is
the name of the Funereal Chest. “The Witness of that which is lifted” is
the name of the Shrine.

The Lion with dazzling mouth and with head bent forwards is the Phallus
of Osiris [_otherwise_ of Râ].

And I who drop the hair which hath loosely fallen upon my brow--I am
Isis, when she concealeth herself; she hath let fall her hair over
herself.

Uat’it the Fiery is the Eye of Râ.

They who mount up against me, woe to them, they are the associates of
Sut as they approach.(24.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE VI.

                    BOOK OF THE DEAD. CHAPTER XVII.

                 PAPYRUS, TRINITY COLLEGE, DUBLIN, IV.

[Illustration]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE VII.

[Illustration]

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.
                             CHAPTER XVII.

                         ---------------------

                    _a._ Berlin Museum.    No. 1470.
                    _b._ British Museum.   No. 9901.

                         ---------------------

              _See_ NAVILLE, “Book of the Dead,” I, Plate.

[Illustration]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                 NOTES.

The seventeenth chapter is one of the most remarkable in the whole
collection, and it has been preserved from times previous to the XIIth
dynasty. The very earliest monuments which have preserved it have handed
it down accompanied with scholia and other commentaries interpolated
into the text. Some of the monuments enable us to some extent to divide
the original text from the additions, in consequence of the latter being
written in red. But there is really only one text where the additions
are suppressed, and which therefore offers the most ancient form, as far
as we know it, of the chapter. This is the copy on the wall of the tomb
of Horhotep. The sarcophagus itself of Horhotep contains a copy of the
text along with the additions. The chapter must already at the time have
been of the most venerable antiquity. Besides these two copies of the
chapter we have those from the sarcophagi of Hora and Sit-Bastit
(published, like those of Horhotep, by M. Maspero[24]), two from the
sarcophagi of Mentuhotep, and one from that of Sebek-āa (the three
latter published by Lepsius in his _Aelteste Texte_). The British Museum
has Sir Gardner Wilkinson’s copy of the texts inscribed on the coffin of
Queen Mentuhotep of the XIth dynasty, and also a fragment (6636 a) of
the coffin of a prince named Hornefru. Here then we have an abundance of
witnesses of the best period. They unfortunately do not agree. The
progress of corruption had no doubt begun long before, and the variants
are not simply differences of orthography but positively different
readings. The differences however are chiefly in the scholia. Even when
the explanations of the text are identical, the form differs. The latest
recensions have retained the form ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂; the
ancient added the feminine ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. _What is that?_
But some of the ancient texts give the equivalent words
⁂⁂⁂⁂, and Horhotep does without them altogether. These words
were evidently additions not merely to the text but to the scholia.

The text of the chapter grew more and more obscure to readers, and the
explanations hitherto given were so unsatisfactory as to call for
others. The texts of the manuscripts of the new empire furnish a good
deal of fresh matter, much of which is extremely ancient, though the
proof of this is unfortunately lost through the disastrous condition of
literature in the period preceding the XVIIIth dynasty. The XVIIIth
dynasty and its immediate successors inherited but did not invent the
new form of the Book of the Dead, with its succession of vignettes,
which however differing in detail bear the stamp of a common traditional
teaching. The manuscripts of a later period bear witness, with reference
to this as well as to other chapters, to a recension of an authoritative
kind. The text becomes more certain though perhaps not either more true
or more intelligible, and the notes and explanations have here reached
their fullest extent.

It would take an entire volume to give the translations of all the forms
the chapter has assumed. It must be sufficient here to give the earliest
forms known to us of the text and of the first commentaries. These are
printed in characters which show the difference between text and later
additions; all of which, it must be remembered, are of extreme
antiquity--some _two thousand years_ before any probable date of Moses.

Explanations or other interesting matter occurring in the manuscripts of
the later Empire will be referred to in the notes.

The title in the early copies is the simple one here heading the
chapter. In those which begin at the XVIIIth dynasty the title is very
like that given for the first chapter. The chief additions are that the
deceased person “_takes every form that he pleases, plays draughts, and
sits in a bower, comes forth as a soul living after death, and that what
is done upon earth is glorified_.”

1. It would be difficult for us to imagine that the very remarkable
opening of the chapter is an addition. Yet it is unknown to the
primitive recension on the walls of Horhotep’s tomb, though found
everywhere else. The texts however which contain it do not agree. “I am
He who closeth, and He who openeth, and I am but One.” ‘He who closeth’
is ⁂⁂ _Tmu_, ‘He who openeth’ ⁂ _Unen_. As the god who closes
and who opens is one and the same, ‘I am but One,’ is a very natural
ending of the sentence, and for its sense the whole may appeal to
classical, and higher than classical, authority.

                               “Modo namque Patulcius idem
             Et modo sacrifico Clusius ore vocor.”[25]

“I am Alpha and O, the beginning and the ending, saith the Lord.”[26]

The meaning of the Egyptian is quite plain, but the readings most
probably through the absence of determinatives in the oldest style are
somewhat different. Horhotep and other texts have ⁂⁂⁂⁂,
apparently as one word (compounded of _tmu_ and _unen_), which may
signify the ‘closer and opener,’ but Sebek-āa and later texts have
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. The papyrus of Nebseni has ⁂⁂, in the
third person, which does not alter the meaning, but this is quite an
isolated reading. The later recension, as represented by the Turin
_Todtenbuch_ and the Cadet papyrus, has ⁂⁂, which only prominently
brings forward, what is implied in all the other texts, that the Opener
is a god.[27] The absence of the determinative ⁂ after ⁂ is no
objection to the sense ‘opener,’ especially after ⁂⁂. It is
absolutely necessary when dealing with mythology to look to physical
rather than to metaphysical meanings. I have sufficiently discussed the
meanings of the word ⁂ in my essay on the Myth of Osiris Unnefer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE III.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

                              CHAPTER XV.

[Illustration: Horus at the Look-out of the Ship.]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The later recensions add an interpolation (not without very different
readings) to the effect that the Sun made his first appearance when Shu
raised the Sky from the height of Chemennu, where he destroyed the
‘Children of Failure’ ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

The raising of the Sky by Shu is very frequently represented in
pictures. Seb (the Earth) and Nut (the Sky) have been sleeping in each
other’s arms during the night; Shu (Daylight at sunrise) parts them, and
the sky is seen to be raised high above the earth.

⁂⁂⁂, Shu, who is of course the son of Râ, is in consequence of
this act called ⁂⁂ _Ȧn-ḥeru_, ‘The Lifter up of the Heaven.’

_Chemennu_ is the geographical name of the town called by the Greeks
Hermopolis. The mystical Chemennu, however, is alone referred to in this
place. The word itself means Eight, and Lepsius sees here a reference to
eight elementary deities. (We must remember that the passage itself is
an interpolation, of which there is no trace in the older texts.)

The ‘children of _Failure_’ (⁂⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂ _deficere_,
_dissolvi_, _deliquium_[28]) are the elements of darkness which melt
away and vanish at the appearance of Day. This mythological expression
here found in an interpolated passage is met later on in a genuine
portion of the older text.

2. It would be impossible to find a more emphatic assertion of the
doctrine of _Nomina Numina_; and that more than 3000 years before
Christ.

The _Names_ of Râ, the Sun-god, are said, when taken together, to
compose ‘the cycle of the gods.’ ⁂⁂. Or the names which he has
created, to which he has given rise, that is the names of all the solar
phenomena, recurring as they do, day after day, to the eyes of all
beholders, compose “the cycle of the gods,” who are also called the
limbs or members of Râ.

The scholia contained in the papyri of the XVIIIth and later dynasties
explain the text as follows:--

“It is Râ as he creates the _names_ of his _limbs_ ⁂ which _become_
the gods who accompany him.”

And the present chapter later on says of Chepera, the rising Sun, that
the “cycle of the gods is his body.”

The god who has hitherto been spoken of is Râ. In glaring contradiction
to the whole text, a later note states that the resistless god is “the
Water, which is _Nu_”; that is Heaven.[29] ⁂⁂⁂ _Nu_ is not
alluded to at all in the primitive text, but the papyrus of Nebseni
already exhibits the corruption of the fine passage, “I am he who
closeth and he who openeth, and I am but One.” This is itself an
addition, the true meaning of which was afterwards destroyed by the
interpolation of the words ⁂⁂⁂⁂. These are ambiguous. They
might mean that the god was alone ‘in heaven,’ or that he was alone
‘_as_ Heaven.’ The papyrus of Ani has ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, “I was
born from Nu.” These attempted improvements do not give a favourable
impression of the exegetical acumen of Egyptian theologians.

But the mention of ‘Water’ in the scholion has nothing whatever to do
with the doctrine of Thales, and to suppose that it has implies a
confusion between two very different realms of human thought.

3. ‘The kinsman of the Morrow,’ literally ‘I know the Morrow.’ The word
⁂ signifies _can_, _ken_, and _kin_.

The papyrus of Nebseni and all the subsequent texts give the explanation
that Yesterday means Osiris, and the Morrow means Râ. And the vignette
in the papyrus of Ani gives the name of Yesterday to one of the Lions
and of Morrow to the other.

4. The earliest texts have either ⁂ ‘speak,’ or ⁂⁂ ‘command.’
The meaning is the same in both readings. Strife arose among the gods at
the bidding of Râ: that is every force in nature began its appropriate
career of activity, necessarily coming into contact and conflict with
the other forces. And of all this collision the first cause, the origin
of all activity and motion, is the Sun.

This mythological cosmology reminds one of the saying of Heraclitos that
“Strife is the father and the king of all things,” and the doctrine that
all becoming must be conceived as the product of warring
opposites--παν´ντα κατ’ ἔριν γίνεσθαι.

5. The Heron is the bird called ⁂⁂⁂ _bennu_, the numerous
pictures of which enable us to identify it with the Common Heron or
Heronshaw. The reason for connecting this bird with the Sun-god has to
be sought in the etymology of its name. ⁂⁂ _ben_ is a verb of
motion, and particularly of ‘going round.’ ⁂⁂ _benenu_ is a ring,
also a ‘round pill.’ The Sun therefore is very naturally called _bennu_,
an appellative like κυκλοέλικτος in the Orphic hymns.

⁂⁂, ‘of that which is, and of that which cometh into being.’ Here,
as in many other places, ⁂, which is a verb of motion, and really
signifies ‘rise up, spring forth,’ is pointedly distinguished from ⁂,
that which (is). So far from signifying ‘being, that which is,’ it very
much more nearly corresponds to ⁂ in the frequent expression
⁂⁂, ‘that which is and that which is not yet.’ The sense of ‘good
being’ so commonly given to the divine name Unnefer is utterly
erroneous.

6. The reading of the name ⁂ is proved by the numerous variants of
this passage to be _Ȧmsu_. In M. Naville’s edition, II, pl. 41, the
name, as written in _Ce_, would seem to be ⁂⁂⁂ _ȧm._ But I
already in _Zeitschr._, 1877 (p. 98) pointed out, that in this
manuscript the last sign ⁂ is at the top of a column, and that at the
foot of the preceding column there is a space where the signs ⁂,
following ⁂⁂ (_as they still do in the next passage_), have been
obliterated. No one from merely looking at M. Naville’s copy would guess
that there was any interval between ⁂ and ⁂.

The god’s name is written ⁂⁂⁂ on a tablet, Denkm. III, 114 i.
And the name is also written ⁂ or ⁂, which are ligatures of ⁂
and ⁂.

7. Note that in this scholion Horus, ‘the avenger of his father,’ calls
his father not Osiris but Tmu. In the more recent texts there are many
interpretations of the two Feathers. One is “his two _Eyes_ are the
Feathers.” But the favourite one is “Isis and Nephthys, who have risen
up as two kites” ⁂⁂⁂⁂.

8. The ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _reḫit_, by whom the oblation is made, the
_present_ generation as contrasted with the ⁂⁂⁂ _pāit_, the
_past_, and ⁂⁂⁂⁂ _hammemit_, the _coming_ generations.

9. ⁂⁂⁂⁂ _Māāāait_ is supposed to be nitre or salt, or some
other substance used in the process of embalming.

The more recent recensions thus answer the question about the lakes.
“_Eternity_ is the name of one, and the _Great green one_ that of the
other, the lake of Natron and the lake of Māāt.”

10. See the picture of this gate on the Vignette, which shows the
Sun-god passing through. One of the later explanations is that from this
gate Shu raised up Heaven. Another is that it was the gate of the Tuat.
_Haukar_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂, means “behind the Shrine.”

11. _Hu_ and _Sau_, sons of Tmu, and his companions in the Solar bark,
are, like so many other gods, Solar appellatives. ⁂⁂⁂⁂ _Hu_
is the Nourisher, ⁂⁂⁂⁂ _Sau_, ‘the Knowing One.’ The god is
also called ‘the Seer’ ⁂, ‘He who heareth’ ⁂⁂. These names are
not personifications of the senses but, as in all cases, appellatives
expressing attributes.

12. See Note 2 on Chapter 4.

13. The Eye (⁂⁂⁂⁂) being the Sun or Moon, the period of
distress (⁂⁂) is that of obscuration or eclipse, and the hairy net
(⁂⁂) which is removed is the shadow which passes for a time over
the heavenly body.

The explanation which M. Maspero has recently given (P.S.B.A. XIV, 314)
of the word ⁂⁂⁂⁂, as connected with ⁂⁂⁂⁂
‘health,’ receives confirmation from the scholia in the papyri,
according to which Thoth not only delivered the Eye from the
veil of darkness which oppressed it, but carried it off
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ ‘in life, health and strength,
without any damage.’

14. Mehurit is explained in the ancient scholion as ‘the Eye,’ but it is
really the Sky, from which the Sun is born daily. The sign of plurality
after Mehurit (if it means anything) only indicates the daily succession
of the skies whence Râ is born.

15. The ‘coffined One’ ⁂⁂⁂ is of course Osiris, as it is
plainly stated in the later scholia, which further add that the ‘Seven
glorious ones’ who follow the coffin, or, as they read it, “their Lord,”
are to be sought in the constellation of ‘the Thigh in the northern
sky,’ that is in the seven stars of the Great Bear.

These stars never set, but are perpetually revolving round the Pole. It
is therefore evidently with the Polar Star that we must identify the
coffin of Osiris. The names of the Seven Glorious ones vary according to
the different authorities. And these Stars themselves receive other
mythical forms; that of the Seven Cows and their Bull is recorded in the
148th chapter. Names like ‘the Red-eyed’ ⁂⁂⁂ or the
‘Red-haired’ cow ⁂⁂ seem to imply _double_ stars. The ‘Red-eyed’
is said to abide in ⁂⁂⁂ ‘house of gauze’ (perhaps a cobweb).

The papyri add the important note that the “day of Come thou hither”!
represents the moment “when Osiris says to Râ, Come thou hither”! or, as
some read, “Come thou to me.” The speaker adds that he sees the meeting
of the two gods in Amenta.

16. ⁂⁂⁂ possessor of completeness, integrity, hence
‘inviolate.’ This name is given to Osiris when restored to his first
condition after having been dismembered and cut into pieces. The god is
called _Râ-Tmu-Nebert’er_ in the great Harris papyrus, 15, 3.

17. It is most probable that the Cat became the representative of the
Sun because of the homonymy between the Egyptian name ⁂⁂⁂⁂
_mȧȧu_ of the animal and the attributive ⁂⁂⁂ _mau_, ‘shining’
said of the Sun. But the Egyptian scribe gives a different etymological
explanation. Sau said of Râ “he is ⁂⁂ _maȧu_ of what he hath
made.” ⁂⁂ may, like the Latin _exemplar_, be either the type or
the prototype, the copy or the original. The creatures of Râ were made
after his likeness. Sanskrit literature, from the Çatapatha Brahmana
down to the Vishnu Purâna, is full of similar etymologies. The Egyptians
from the very first delighted in this play upon words.

18. Neḥebu-kau, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ or ⁂⁂⁂⁂> is
the son of Seb and Renenut. The etymology of the name is indicated in
the Pyramid texts. ⁂⁂⁂⁂ _neḥbu_ is to ‘carry, sustain,
support’ (whence ⁂⁂⁂⁂ _neḥbet_ a neck, and ⁂⁂⁂⁂
_neḥb_ a yoke), and the rest of the word is the plural of _ka_, which is
susceptible of more than one meaning. It might signify the divine or
human _ka_, but the word is sometimes (_e.g._, Todt., 125, 32) written
⁂ ‘victuals.’ The god is one of the forty-two judges of the dead, and
in some copies of the Book of the Dead he is described as coming forth
from his ⁂⁂⁂, a word most frequently used for the source of the
Nile. The serpent ⁂ which is a most frequent determinative of the
name, is an additional reason for identifying this god with the Nile: a
conclusion which seems fully justified by the Pyramid texts, which speak
of him as Water ⁂, and describe him as ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, “of
many windings.” (See Pepi I, 341 and 487.)

19. This Devourer has the same functions as the strange animal called
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _Âmemit_ in the pictures of the Psychostasia. The
later scholia add that the Devourer comes from the ‘basin of Punit,’ the
Red sea. They add other names, ⁂⁂⁂⁂ _Mâtes_ ‘Flint,’
“stationed at the gate of Amenta,” and ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ or ⁂
_Baba_, who, in ch. 63, 2, is described as the first born of Osiris. He
is a terrible god from whom the deceased prays in ch. 125, 36, to be
delivered. His name implies ‘one who searches or probes thoroughly,’ as
a digger or miner. And such are his functions at the judgment of the
dead.

Instead of ⁂⁂ _tesem_, a ‘hound,’ _La_ reads ⁂⁂⁂⁂
_sȧu_, a sheep.

20. The ⁂⁂⁂ _Mesqȧt_ is a ⁂⁂⁂ ‘a place of scourging.’
The word ⁂⁂⁂ is known as signifying violent treatment by
beating, and has been illustrated by Chabas and Goodwin. See
_Zeitschr._, 1874, p. 62. In the 72nd chapter the deceased prays that he
may not perish at the _Mesqȧt_. A kindred word ⁂⁂⁂⁂ _Mesqa_
signifies ‘a hide.’ We can understand the connection between δέρω ‘flay,
cudgel, thrash’ and δέρμα ‘a hide.’ And we ourselves have the familiar
phrase of ‘giving a _hiding_.’ But purification as well as punishment
was found at the heavenly _mesqȧt_. It is mentioned in the Harris
Magical papyrus[6, 3] simply as a heavenly thing. In the more recent
scholia the purifier is said to be Anubis, who is behind the chest
containing the remains of Osiris.

After the scholion which has just been translated the early texts pass
on to the 18th chapter.

For the rest of the chapter we are compelled to follow the texts of the
papyri. The character of this portion differs considerably from the
former part, and is clearly an addition. The speakers rapidly succeed
each other. “I am Tmu,” “I am Isis,” “I was conceived by Isis,” “Isis
destroyeth what in me is wrong,” and finally “I am Uat’it.”

21. Cher-âbat and Heliopolis like all the localities here mentioned are
in heaven not upon earth.

22. Uat’it is literally ‘the pale one,’ a name of the Dawn. But here the
fiery dawn is spoken of, ἠώς φλογερά, πυρίβρομος.

23. Hemen ⁂⁂⁂ is a divinity seldom, if ever, mentioned after
the “Middle Empire.” In the Pyramid texts he has a Snake (the River) in
his hand.

24. The last line of the chapter has suffered in all the best papyri.
See M. Naville’s collation. In the papyrus of Ani the chapter is
unfinished. The later papyri end the chapter by saying that “it has been
granted to the speaker by those who are in Tattu to destroy by fire the
souls of his adversaries.” This consummation is already found in _La_.

[Illustration]

-----

Footnote 20:

  ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, _praeconium_,
  _praeco_.

Footnote 21:

  The god who lifteth up his arm is ⁂ Amsu.

Footnote 22:

  ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _ȧnem_ ‘skin,’ according to Horhotep and
  the first coffin of Mentuhotep at Berlin. But the second coffin of
  Mentuhotep has already ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _ȧnḥu_ ‘eyebrows,’
  which afterwards becomes the received reading. It is that of Queen
  Mentuhotep.

Footnote 23:

  An interpolation in the text of Horhotep.

Footnote 24:

  _Mission archéologique Française au Caire_, II.

Footnote 25:

  Ovid, _Fast_, I, 129, 130.

Footnote 26:

  Apocalypse i, 8.

Footnote 27:

  The _last_ form of the chapter (as found in the hieratic papyrus T. 16
  of Leyden, and others in the British Museum) changes the opening as
  follows--“I am Atmu, who made the Sky and created all that hath come
  into being.”

Footnote 28:

  ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ in the historical inscriptions is just like
  the Greek γυῖα λέλυντο, λύτο γούνατα καὶ φίλον ἡτορ.

Footnote 29:

  It is certain that from the earliest times Heaven as
  ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ ‘the Great Weeper,’ was considered as the
  source of life to gods and men. But myths must not be mixed. One must
  not be considered as the explanation of another.

PLATE VIII.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration:

  Papyrus of Ani.
  INTRODUCTION TO CHAPTER XVIII.
]

[Illustration:

  Leyden Papyrus.
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XVIII. =Papyrus Busca.=
  NAVILLE, “Book of the Dead.”
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE IX

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration: CHAPTER XVIII. BRUGSCH, “Thesaurus,” Vol. V, p. 1190.]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XIX. =Papyrus du Louvre, 440.=
  E. DE ROUGÉ, “Études sur le Rituel Funéraire,” p. 14.
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XIX. =Papyrus du Louvre, 3079.=
  E. DE ROUGÉ, “Études sur le Rituel Funéraire,” p. 13
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER XVIII.

                           [_Introductory._]


_The An-māut(1.) saith_:--

I come to you, ye Great Circles of gods(2.) in Heaven, upon Earth and in
the World below! I bring to you _N_ void of offence towards any of the
gods, grant that he may be with you daily.

Glory to Osiris, Lord of Restau, and to the great gods who are in the
World below. Here is _N_ who saith:--Hail to thee, Prince of Amenta,
Unneferu who presidest in Abydos, I come to thee with Righteousness;
without sin upon me. I am not knowingly a speaker of wrong; I am not
given to duplicity; grant me Bread, the right of appearance at the
tables of the Lords of Maāt, entering in and going out of the
Netherworld, and that my soul may not suffer repulse in its devotion to
the orb of the Sun and the vision of the Moon-god for ever.

_The Se-meri-f saith_:--

I come to you, O Circle of gods in Restau, and I bring to you _N_. Grant
to him Bread, Water, Air and an allotment in the Sechit-hotepu like
Horus.

Glory to Osiris, the Lord of Eternity and to the Circle of gods in
Restau. Here is _N_ and he saith:--I come to thee, I know thy will, and
I am furnished with thine attributes of the Tuat. Grant me an abiding
place in the Netherworld by the Lords of Maāt, my permanent allotment in
the Sechit-hotepu, and the receiving of cakes before thee.

                               [LITANY.]

1. Oh Thoth, who makest Osiris triumphant over his adversaries, let _N_
be made triumphant over his adversaries, even as thou makest Osiris
triumphant over his adversaries, before the Circle of gods about Rā and
about Osiris and the Great Circle of gods in Heliopolis, on that Night
of the _Eve’s Provender_(3.) and the Night of Battle when there befel
the Defeat of the Sebau, and the Day of the extinction of the
adversaries of the Inviolate god.

The Great Circle of gods in Heliopolis is of Tmu, Shu and Tefnut, and
the Sebau who were defeated and extinguished were the associates of Sut
on the renewal of his assault.

2. Oh Thoth who makest Osiris triumphant over his adversaries, let _N_
be made triumphant over his adversaries, even as thou makest Osiris
triumphant over his adversaries before the Great Circle of gods in
Tattu, on the Night wherein the Tat is set up in Tattu.(4.)

The Great Circle of gods in Tattu is of Osiris, Isis, Nephthys and Horus
the Avenger of his Father; and they who set up the Tat are the two arms
of Horus, Prince of Sechem. They are behind Osiris as bindings of his
raiment.

3. Oh Thoth who makest Osiris triumphant over his adversaries, let _N_
be made triumphant over his adversaries, even as thou makest Osiris
triumphant over his adversaries, before the Great Circle of gods in
Sechem on that Night of the _Eve’s Provender_ in Sechem.

The Great Circle of gods in Sechem is of Horus in the Dark,(5.) and
Thoth, who is of the Great Circle of An-arer-ef.

The _Eve’s Provender_ is the dawn upon the Coffin of Osiris.

4. Oh Thoth, who makest Osiris triumphant over his adversaries, let _N_
be made triumphant over his adversaries, even as thou makest Osiris
triumphant over his adversaries, before the Great Circle of gods in Pu
and Tepu,(6.) on that Night of erecting the flag-staffs of Horus, and of
establishing him as heir of his Father’s property.

The Great Circle of gods in Pu and Tepu is of Horus, Isis, Emsta, Hapi;
and the pillars of Horus are erected when Horus saith to those who
follow him “let the flag-staffs be erected there.”

5. Oh Thoth, who makest Osiris triumphant over his adversaries, let _N_
be made triumphant over his adversaries, even as thou makest Osiris
triumphant over his adversaries, before the Great Circle of gods of the
Two Regions[30] of Rechit, on that Night when Isis lay watching in tears
over her brother Osiris.

The Great Circle of gods on the Two Regions of Rechit is of Isis,
Nephthys, Emsta and Hapi.

6. Oh Thoth, who makest Osiris triumphant over his adversaries, let _N_
be made triumphant over his adversaries, even as thou makest Osiris
triumphant over his adversaries, before the Great Circle of gods in
Abydos on the night of Hakra,(7.) when the evil dead are parted off,
when the glorious ones are rightly judged, and joy goeth its round in
Thinis.

The Great Circle of gods in Abydos is of Osiris, Isis and Apuat.

7. Oh Thoth, who makest Osiris triumphant over his adversaries, let _N_
be made triumphant over his adversaries, even as thou makest Osiris
triumphant over his adversaries, before the Great Circle of gods on the
Highway of the Damned,(8.) upon the Night when judgment is passed upon
those who are no more.

The Great Circle of gods on the Highway of the Damned are Thoth, Osiris,
Anubis and Astes. And judgment is passed on the Highway of the Damned
when the suit is closed[31] against the souls of the Children of
Failure.

8. Oh Thoth, who makest Osiris triumphant over his adversaries, let _N_
be made triumphant over his adversaries, even as thou makest Osiris
triumphant over his adversaries, before the Great Circle of gods at the
Great Hoeing in Tattu, on the Night of Hoeing in their blood and
effecting the triumph of Osiris over his adversaries.

The Great Circle of gods at the Great Hoeing in Tattu(9.) when the
associates of Sut arrive, and take the forms of goats, slay them before
the gods there, while their blood runneth down; and this is done
according to the judgment of those gods who are in Tattu.

9. Oh Thoth, who makest Osiris triumphant over his adversaries, let _N_
be made triumphant over his adversaries, even as thou makest Osiris
triumphant over his adversaries, before the Great Circle of gods in
An-arer-ef on the Night of Hiding him who is Supreme in Attributes.[32]

The Great Circle of gods in An-arer-ef is of Shu, Babai, Rā and Osiris,
and the Night of Hiding him who is Supreme of Attributes is when there
are at the Coffin, the Thigh, the Head, the Heel and the Leg of
Unneferu.

10. Oh Thoth, who makest Osiris triumphant over his adversaries, let _N_
be made triumphant over his adversaries, even as thou makest Osiris
triumphant over his adversaries before the Great Circle of gods in
Restau on the Night when Anubis lieth(10.) with his hands upon the
objects behind Osiris, when Osiris is made to triumph over his
adversaries.

The Great Circle of gods in Restau is of Osiris, Horus, and Isis. The
heart of Horus rejoiceth, the heart of Osiris is glad and the two
Parts[33] of Heaven are satisfied when Thoth effecteth the triumph of
_N_ before these ten Great Circles about Rā and about Osiris and the
Circles of gods attached to every god and every goddess before the
Inviolate god. All his adversaries are destroyed and all that was wrong
in him is also destroyed.

_Let the person say this chapter, he will be purified and come forth by
day, after his death, and take all forms for the satisfaction of his
will, and if this chapter be recited over him, he will be prosperous
upon earth, he will come forth safe from every fire, and no evil thing
will approach him: with undeviating regularity for times infinite._(11.)

                                 NOTES.

The eighteenth chapter is one of those found in the earliest copies of
the Book of the Dead, on the wooden coffins of the ‘Old’ and ‘Middle’
Empires; the most complete ancient copy being on the coffin of Queen
Mentuhotep of the eleventh dynasty.

It consists of a Litany addressed to Thoth, who is invoked for securing
the triumph of the departed against his adversaries in presence of the
gods of certain localities. Each petition has reference to some
mythological event, and is supplemented by the enumeration of the gods
constituting the divine company presiding at the locality named, and
sometimes by a short comment on the myth referred to.

The order of petitions is somewhat different in the later recensions,
and the text has suffered other alterations.

Copies of this chapter are extremely numerous, particularly in the later
periods.

The chapter really begins with the petitions to Thoth. The preceding
portion is, as far as I know, found only in the Papyrus of Ani. But as
the vignette which belongs to this portion has a place in the great
Leyden Papyrus of Kenna, the text cannot have been confined to a single
manuscript. It is particularly valuable as illustrative of the ritual
use of portions of the Book of the Dead.

1. The deceased person is supposed to be presented to the gods by two
priests in succession, one called _An-maut-ef_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂, and
the other ⁂⁂ _Se-meri-f_. Both names are titles of Horus, and it
is the usual thing for Egyptian priests to bear divine titles; their
ritual observances being dramatic and symbolical representations of the
actions of the gods. _An-maut-ef_ literally signifies ‘column (support)
of his mother.’ Horus is called ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ ‘the
_An-maut-ef_ of the Great Company of the gods’ (Mariette, _Abydos_, I,
p. 34), and in _Denkmäler_, III, 206 _e_, he is called the _An-maut-ef_
of Osiris (_cf._ _Abyd._ II, 54).

_Se-meri-f_ signifies ‘the Beloved Son,’ and the priest of this name in
the funereal rites personified Horus in his dutiful offices to his
father Osiris. I do not know why ⁂⁂ is _always_ translated ‘the
son who loves him,’ instead of ‘the son he loves,’ which is the right
meaning. ⁂⁂⁂ is ‘the place which he loves’ not ‘the place which
loves him.’ And similarly ⁂⁂ is ‘the wife whom he loves,’ not ‘who
loves him.’

2. There is a short note (6) on chapter 1, upon the word
⁂⁂⁂⁂, but the present seems to be the suitable place for a
more extended notice of this feminine word, which is a collective noun,
and never found in any other sense.

The ancient form ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ renders it more than probable that
⁂ is not phonetic in the later form, but that as in ⁂⁂ _kai_,
originally ⁂⁂ (whence the Coptic ⲕⲟⲧ, ⲕⲱⲧⲉ, a circle, a round
vessel, to go round), it is ideographic of _roundness_. This concept is
certainly to be found in the word ⁂⁂⁂, the Coptic ϫⲱϫ, a head
(or rather top of the head), as in the Latin _vertex_, akin to _vortex_,
from the same root as _vertere_. The sign ⁂, which in later texts
often appears as the determinative, has its origin in the cursive form
of ⁂ carelessly written. Instead of ⁂ we also find ⁂, which is
certainly not phonetic but ideographic of _enclosure_, as in the word
⁂⁂⁂⁂ a wall, _paries_, ἕρκος. This word occurs already in
the Pyramid Texts under the form ⁂⁂⁂. See Pepi I, 571, which M.
Maspero renders ‘la Grande _Enceinte_ d’On.’ The evident etymological
relationship to the Coptic ϫⲱϫ has led some scholars to translate the
Egyptian word as signifying _chiefs_, _princes_. But though the lexicons
give _dux_ and _princeps_ as meanings of the Coptic word, these are but
secondary applications of _head_. We have to enquire why ϫⲱϫ means
_head_, or _top of the head_. And the reason is its roundness, as
indicated by the ideographic signs ⁂ or ⁂.

The old Egyptian word ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ invariably implies an
association of persons, and this is why in consequence of its etymology
I translate it as ‘Circle of gods.’ It is synonymous (_cf._ chapter 41,
note 8) with ⁂⁂⁂.

3. _The Eve’s Provender._ Later authorities read
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, the ‘Provender of the altars,’ but this is a
corruption of the ancient ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, which had probably
ceased to be intelligible. According to this pantheistic system the
deceased through his identification with the Sun absorbed and consumed
all that came in his way. And this is expressed in somewhat brutal
style. Men and gods disappear before Unas, he makes his breakfast at
dawn ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, upon great gods, his dinner upon gods of
middling quality ⁂⁂, and ‘his supper at even’
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ upon the minor deities, ⁂⁂. ⁂⁂ is
the ancient dialectic variant of ⁂, which however is really the older
form. This word which means ‘things’ has, like the Latin _res_, a wide
application. It frequently means _property_, _estate_, and sometimes
_suit_.

4. On the last day of the month of Choiak the great solemnity of setting
up the Tat ⁂ as the symbol of Osiris was observed down to the latest
periods. The tablets of Pasherenptah, high priest of Ptah at Memphis,
speak of this great dignitary as the king’s second or deputy in ‘Raising
the Tat.’ But Brugsch has published a picture (_Thesaurus_, V, 1190),
copied by Dr. Erman from a tomb of the XVIIIth dynasty, in which
Amenophis III himself helps to raise the Tat, and the queen Ti and the
royal princesses take part in the ceremony. The procession is described
as marching four times round the sanctuary of Ptah-Seker-Osiris. See
Plate IX.

5. On Horus in the Dark, or Blindness, or Invisibility ⁂, see note,
_Proc. Soc. Bibl. Arch._, June, 1886.

6. Pu and Tepu are named together in the earliest texts as one locality,
which is recognised by Brugsch as the metropolis of the northern nome
called by the Greeks Φθενότης.

7. The feast of ⁂⁂ derives its name, as Goodwin supposes with
great probability, from the words ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _ha-k-er-ȧ_,
‘Come thou to me,’ said of a legendary incident like that mentioned at
the end of note 15 on chapter 17. The early papyri read ⁂⁂⁂⁂
but this is no objection, the sign ⁂ being here the determinative of
the entire group which gives its name to the feast.

8. ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ literally the _dead_, that is those who have
died ‘the second death.’

9. The vignette is given by M. Naville from the tracing taken by Lepsius
of the now lost Papyrus Busca. It represents ‘the Great Hoeing in
Tattu.’ The long text at Dendera (Mariette, tom. IV, pl. 39) contains
directions to be observed the festival commemorative of the ancient
myth. Two black cows are put under a yoke of ⁂⁂⁂ _ȧm_ wood, the
plough is of tamarisk wood and the share of black bronze. The plougher
goes behind, with a cow led by a halter. A little child with the lock
⁂ attached to its head is to scatter the seed in the field of Osiris,
a piece of land of which the dimensions were given in the text (now
imperfect). Barley is sown at one end, spelt at the other, and flax
between the two. And the Cher-heb in chief recites the Office for the
Sowing of the Field.

10. The older texts have ⁂⁂ _lie_, the later ones

11. In the formula ⁂ ⁂⁂, ⁂ _šes_ is “the measuring
line used by builders,” and _em šes_ signifies ‘ad amussim,’ ‘nach der
Schnur,’ ‘au cordeau,’ ‘according to the line,’ hence ‘with the
strictest accuracy.’ _Hibbert Lectures_, 1879, p. 121. ‘According to the
line of Maāt’ means ‘with undeviating regularity.’

-----

Footnote 30:

  ⁂⁂⁂⁂. The later recensions read ⁂⁂⁂. The
  first Coffin of Mentuhotep (_Aelteste Texte_, 4, 61) has the phonetic
  ⁂⁂⁂.

Footnote 31:

  Literally, “when the things ⁂ are shut up.”

Footnote 32:

  ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

Footnote 33:

  ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, North and South.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER XIX.

                   _Chapter of the Crown of Triumph._


Thy Father Tmu hath prepared for thee this beautiful Crown of Triumph,
the living diadem which the gods love, that thou mayest live for ever.
Osiris, Prince of Amenta, maketh thee to triumph over thine adversaries.
Thy Father Seb hath decreed that thou should be his heir, and be
heralded as Triumphant, Horus son of Isis and son of Osiris, upon the
throne of thy Father Rā, through the defeat of thine adversaries. He
hath decreed for thee the Two Earths, absolutely and without
condition(1.). And so hath Atmu decreed, and the Cycle of the gods hath
repeated the glorious act of the triumph of Horus the son of Isis and
the son of Osiris for ever and ever.

Osiris, the Prince of Amenta, the Two Parts of Heaven united, all gods
and all goddesses who are in heaven and upon earth join in effecting the
Triumph of Horus the son of Isis and son of Osiris over his adversaries
before the Great Circle of gods in Heliopolis, on the _Night_, etc.

Horus repeateth the proclamation four times. All the adversaries fall
and are overthrown and slaughtered.

_N_ repeateth the proclamation four times, and all his adversaries fall
and are overthrown and slaughtered.

Horus son of Isis and son of Horus repeateth an infinite number of
festivals, and all his adversaries fall down, are overthrown and
slaughtered. Their abode is transferred to the slaughtering block of the
East, their heads are cut away, their necks are crushed, their thighs
are lopped off, they are given to the great Annihilator who resideth in
the Valley(2.) that they may not ever escape from under the custody of
Seb.(3.)

_This chapter is said over a consecrated crown placed upon the face of
the person, and thou shalt put incense upon the flame, for N (the
deceased), effecting his triumph over all his adversaries, whether Dead
or Living, that he may become one of the followers of Osiris. And there
shall be given to him drink and food in presence of this god. Thou shall
say it at dawn twice; A great protection is it: with undeviating
regularity for times infinite._

                                 NOTES.

The nineteenth chapter is a very recent recension of the eighteenth. The
MSS. containing it, as far as we know, are not older than the Greek
period. It derives its origin from the practice of placing garlands or
floral crowns upon the mummies. The mummy of Aahmes I, the first king of
the eighteenth dynasty, when found “portait au cou,” M. Maspero writes,
“une guirlande de jolies fleurs roses de _Delphinium orientale_.”
Remains of such crowns are to be found in our Museums. For farther
details I must refer to an excellent paper entitled _La Couronne de la
Justification_, by Dr. Pleyte of Leyden, in the second volume of the
Transactions of the Oriental Congress held at Leyden in 1884; and
seevPlate VIII.

1. ⁂⁂⁂. This adverbial expression is apparently connected with
⁂⁂, and I therefore understand it in the sense of ἀποτόμως,
_praecisè_, _absolutely_, _without condition_.

2. ⁂⁂⁂ the Valley of Darkness (_Todt._, 130, 6) and Death,
“whose secrets are absolutely unknown” ⁂⁂⁂⁂ (148, 2).

3. That is they shall remain interred for ever.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER XX.


The twentieth chapter is entitled _Another Chapter of Crown of Triumph_,
but it is simply a tabulated form of chapter 18, with the Rubric. _Let
the person say this Chapter, and purify himself with water of natron, he
will come forth by day after death, and take all forms according to his
wish, and escape from the fire. With undeviating regularity for times
infinite._ The earliest example of this tabulated form of the chapter is
found on the Berlin Sarcophagus of Mentuhotep.

[Illustration: DÜMICHEN; TEMPELINSCHRIFTEN, LXXV.]

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER XXI.

     _Chapter whereby the mouth of a person is given to him in the
                             Netherworld._


Hail to thee, Lord of Light, who art Prince of the House which is
encircled by Darkness and Obscurity. I am come to thee glorified and
purified.

My hands are behind thee; thy portion is that of those who have gone
before thee.(1.)

Give me my mouth that I may speak with it; and guide(2.) my heart at its
hour of Darkness and Night.

                                 NOTES.

The oldest papyrus containing this chapter is that of Ani, and the
translation is based upon it. But the text differs both from those
written on the very ancient coffins of Heru and Set-Bastit, copied by M.
Maspero,[34] and from the later texts.

The second paragraph seems to be spoken by the god, the first and third
being from the deceased.

“My hands are behind thee” is a formula implying protection.

On the coffins the invocation is addressed not to “Osiris, Lord of
Light” or “Radiant One” ⁂⁂, but to the ⁂⁂⁂, “one whose
head is clothed with radiant white, of the House of Darkness and
Obscurity.”

Instead of ⁂⁂⁂⁂ “obscurity” the coffin has ⁂⁂ without
a determinative, but ⁂⁂⁂⁂ shows what the word means.

This ancient text continues--“Come thou to me, glorified and purified;
let thy hands [_here the text is obliterated_], shine thou with thine
head (⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂). Give me my mouth that I may speak with it,
and guide me on the glorious roads which are in heaven.”

The Turin text is very corrupt, and parts of it are incapable of
translation.

1. ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

2. “Let me guide,” according to the Ani Papyrus. But the later
(hieratic) texts have the second person ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, which is
more correct.

-----

Footnote 34:

  _Mission Archéologique Française_, II, p. 216 and 223. The text is
  unfortunately incomplete on both coffins.

PLATE X.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration: CHAPTER XV. =Papyrus of Ani.=]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XXVIII.
  =Papyrus, Leyden, T. 16.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XXII. =Tomb of Bekenrenef.=
  LEPSIUS, “Denkmäler,” Abth. III, Bl. 267.
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XXIII. =Tomb of Bekenrenef.=
  LEPSIUS, “Denkmäler,” Abth. III, Bl. 260.
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XXVIII.
  NICHOLSON, “Egyptiaca.”
]

[Illustration: CHAPTER XXII. =Papyrus of Ani.=]

                             CHAPTER XXIII.

[Illustration: =Papyrus, British Museum, 9900.=]

                             CHAPTER XXIV.

[Illustration: =Papyrus of Ani.=]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XI.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

                             CHAPTER XXII.

[Illustration: =Sarcophagus of Seti I.=]

                             CHAPTER XXIII.

[Illustration: LEPSIUS, “Todtenbuch,” 17, Vignette.]

                             CHAPTER XXVII.

[Illustration: =Papyrus, Musée du Louvre, III, 89.=]

                             CHAPTER XXVII.

[Illustration: =Papyrus, Musée du Louvre, III, 36.=]

                             CHAPTER XXVII.

[Illustration: =Papyrus of Ani.=]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER XXII.

 _Another Chapter whereby the Mouth of a person is given to him in the
                             Netherworld._


I shine forth out of the Egg which is in the unseen world.(1.) Let there
be given my mouth that I may speak with it in presence of the great god,
Lord of the Tuat. Let not my hand be repulsed by the Divine Circle of
the great god.

I am Osiris, the Lord of Restau, the same who is at the head of the
Staircase.(2.)

I am come to do the will of my heart, out of the Tank of Flame, which I
extinguish when I come forth.(3.)

                                 NOTES.

This is one of the chapters of which the text certainly belongs to the
earliest epoch. It is one of those copied by Wilkinson from the
coffin(2) of Queen Mentuhotep. In the Papyrus of Ani it is followed by
chapter 21 as its conclusion, and both chapters are appended to chapter
1, before the rubric belonging to that chapter.

1. The Egg in the unseen world is the globe of the Sun while yet below
the horizon. It is only through a mistranslation of chapter 54, 2 that
the Indian notion of a ‘Mundane Egg’ has been ascribed to the Egyptians.

The 17th chapter addresses “Rā in thine Egg, who risest up in thine orb,
and shinest from thine Horizon.”

2. See the picture of Osiris at the head of the Staircase, which is here
given (see Plate XI) from the alabaster sarcophagus of Seti I in the
Soane Museum. Similar pictures are given on other sarcophagi. The gods
on the stairs are called ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, ‘the Divine
Circle about Osiris.’

The ‘Staircase of the great god’ ⁂⁂⁂⁂ at Abydos, is
frequently mentioned on the funeral stelae.

3. The _Tank of Flame_. See chapter 1, note 15. The red glow of the Sky
disappears after the Sun has risen, he is therefore said to “extinguish
the Flame” after he has come forth. The same notion is expressed in the
myth according to which Horus strikes off the head of his mother.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER XXIII.

    _Chapter whereby the Mouth of a person is opened for him in the
                             Netherworld._


_He saith_: Let my mouth be opened by Ptah, and let the muzzles which
are upon my mouth be loosed by the god of my domain.(1.)

Then let Thoth come, full and equipped with Words of Power,[35] and let
him loose the muzzles of Sutu which are upon my mouth, and let Tmu lend
a hand to fling them at the assailants.

Let my mouth be given to me. Let my mouth be opened by Ptah with that
instrument of steel(2.) wherewith he openeth the mouths of the gods.

I am Sechit(3.) Uat’it who sitteth on the right side of Heaven: I am
Sahit encircled by the Spirits of Heliopolis.[36]

And all the Words of Power, and all the accusations which are uttered
against me--the gods stand firm against them: the cycles of the gods
unitedly.

                                 NOTES.

1. Osiris. On the sense of ⁂⁂⁂, literally ‘the god of the
domain,’ see the articles of M. Naville and Professor Piehl,
_Zeitschr._, 1880, 146; 1881, 24 and 64. I hold with Dr. Piehl that the
domain meant in this formula is Abydos, and that the god is Osiris.

2. The word here translated ‘steel’ is ⁂⁂⁂, upon which see M.
Devéria’s dissertation, “Le Fer et l’Aimant” in the _Mélanges
d’Archéologie Egyptienne et Assyrienne_, tome I, p. 2.

A description of the Ceremonies of the Opening of the Mouth as performed
at the tomb will be found in the Introduction to this translation.

3. The name of this goddess is phonetically written ⁂⁂ _Sḫt_ in
the Pyramid texts of Unas (l. 390), where the Murray Papyrus and other
texts have the ordinary ⁂⁂. The reading Sechemet is indefensible.
Cf. _Proc. Soc. Bibl. Arch._, XII, p. 365.

-----

Footnote 35:

  ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

Footnote 36:

  Tmu, Shu and Tefnut.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER XXIV.

   _Chapter whereby the Words of Power are brought to a Person in the
                             Netherworld._


I am Chepera, the self-produced, on his Mother’s thigh.(1.)

The speed of bloodhounds is given to those who are in Heaven,[37] and
the mettle of hyaenas(2.) to those who belong to the Divine Circle.

Lo, I bring this my Word of Power, and I collect this Word of Power from
every quarter in which it is, more persistently(3.) than hounds of chase
and more swiftly than the Light.

O thou who guidest the Bark of Rā, sound is thy rigging and free from
disaster as thou passest on to the Tank of Flame.

Lo, I collect[38] this my Word of Power from every quarter in which it
is, in behalf of every person whom it concerneth, more persistently than
hounds of chase and more swiftly than Light; the same(4.) who create the
gods out of Silence, or reduce them to inactivity; the same who impart
warmth to the gods.

Lo, I collect this my Word of Power from every quarter in which it is,
in behalf of every person whom it concerneth, more persistently than
hounds of chase and more swiftly than the Light.

                                 NOTES.

This is another of those chapters of which the antiquity is proved by
the coffins of Horhotep and Queen Mentuhotep. And even in the early
times to which these coffins belong it must have been extremely
difficult to understand. In the translation here given I have adhered as
closely as possible to the oldest texts, but these, as the variants
show, are not entirely trustworthy.

1. _Thigh._ This is the usual translation, which accords with the
frequent pictures of the goddess Nut, as the Sky, with the divine Scarab
in the position described.[39] But ⁂⁂⁂ signifies that which
_runs_, from ⁂⁂⁂ _uār_, run, _fugere_; and the noun (_the
runner_) is often applied to _running water_. It is the geographical
name of a river or canal. M. Naville has already pointed out that in the
Book of the Dead it has for variants ⁂⁂⁂ and ⁂⁂⁂, of
which _bath_ is a fair translation.

2. The names of these two animals (especially of the second) vary
greatly in the texts. But if we wish rightly to understand the sense of
the chapter, we must bear in mind that it is not the animals themselves
that are meant, but the characteristics implied by the names of the
animals. And as the Sanskrit _vṛkas_, the Greek λύκος, the old Slavonic
_vluku_, the Gothic _vulfs_, and our own _wolf_, signify the _robber_,
so does the Egyptian ⁂⁂⁂⁂, whether signifying _wolf_,
_wolfhound_, or _bloodhound_, indicate _speed_.

The names of the second animal in the earlier texts, whether they stand
for hyænas ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, or for other animals of the chase
(⁂⁂⁂⁂), imply either _speed_ or _ferocity_. And what must we
understand under the latter term? We must look to the context. It is of
a god speaking of himself and of his attributes. He is proud of them,
and certainly does not wish them to be taken in a bad sense. Nor is it
necessary that we should do so. We have only to remember what we learnt
at school.

Cicero (_de Sen._, 10, 33) contrasts the ‘ferocitas juvenum,’ the high
_pluck_ of the young, with the ‘infirmitas puerorum,’ and the ‘gravitas’
and ‘maturitas’ of later periods of life.

Livy uses the term _ferox_, in the same sense as Cicero.

What we have to understand of the Egyptian expression is, ‘mettlesome,
of high, unbridled spirit.’

In the later texts the _Bennu_ bird has been substituted for the beasts
of the chase.

3. The later texts read ⁂⁂, but all the earlier ones give another
word ⁂⁂ or ⁂⁂. This is often used in a bad sense, when
spoken of the enemy; but it merely implies tenacity, pertinacity,
obstinacy, which are, of course, very bad things in opposition, but in
themselves virtues of a high order.[40]

The word is used as a name for the divine Cynocephali
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ who appear at sunrise over the _Tank of
Flame_.

4.
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂,
_the same who bringeth into being the gods out of Silence, or reduceth
them to inactivity_.

In addition to this interesting utterance of Egyptian theology, we have
to note the idea of _Silence_ ⁂⁂⁂ as the origin of the gods, or
powers of nature. The notion was also current in the Greek world. The
writer of the _Philosophumena_ (VI, 22) speaks of ἡ ὑμνουμένη ἐκείνη
παρὰ τοῖς Ἕλλησι Ζιγή. It was from this source that the early Gnostic
Valentinus borrowed this item of his system. St. Irenaeus (_Haeres_, II,
14) charges him with having taken it from the theogony of the comic poet
Antiphanes.

-----

Footnote 37:

  ⁂⁂ _Nu_.

Footnote 38:

  ⁂.

Footnote 39:

  See also in Plate XI the Vignette from chapter 17 in the Turin and all
  the later papyri.

Footnote 40:

  Columella speaks of the “contumacia pervicax boum.”

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER XXV.

  _Chapter whereby a person remembereth his name in the Netherworld._


Let my name be given to me in the Great House. Let me remember my name
in the House of Flame(1.) on the Night wherein the Years are counted and
the Months are reckoned, one by one.

I am He who dwelleth in Heaven, and who sitteth on the Eastern side of
Heaven: and if there be any god who cometh not in my train, I utter his
name at once.

                                 NOTES.

1. Every Egyptian Temple being symbolical of Heaven, had its Great House
⁂⁂⁂ and its House of Flame ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, as most sacred
adyta at the extremity opposite to the entrance. The former occupied the
central position, like the Ladye Chapel in our cathedrals, and the
latter stood by the side of it.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER XXVI.

 _Chapter whereby the Heart(1.) is given to a person in the Netherworld._


He saith: Heart[41] mine to me, in the place of Hearts! Whole Heart[42]
mine to me, in the place of Whole Hearts!

Let me have my Heart that it may rest within me; but(2.) I shall feed
upon the food of Osiris, on the eastern side of the mead of amaranthine
flowers.(3.)

Be mine a bark for descending the stream and another for ascending.

I go down into the bark wherein thou art.

Be there given to me my mouth wherewith to speak, and my feet for
walking; and let me have my arms wherewith to overthrow my adversaries.

Let two hands from the Earth open my mouth: Let Seb, the Erpā of the
gods, part my two jaws;(4.) let him open my two eyes which are closed,
and give motion to my two hands which are powerless: and let Anubis give
vigour to my legs, that I may raise myself up upon them.

And may Sechit the divine one lift me up, so that I may arise in Heaven
and issue my behest in Memphis.

I am in possession of my Heart, I am possession of my Whole Heart, I am
possession of my arms and I have possession of my legs.(5.)

[I do whatsoever my Genius willeth, and my Soul is not bound to my body
at the gates of Amenta.]

                                 NOTES.

1. The Egyptian texts have two names for the Heart, ⁂ phonetically
written ⁂⁂⁂ _ȧb_, and ⁂⁂ also written ⁂⁂⁂ and
⁂⁂⁂ _ḥatu_.[43] The two words are commonly used synonymously,
but they are sometimes pointedly distinguished one from the other.
Etymologically ⁂⁂⁂ _ȧb_ is connected with the sense of lively
motion ⁂⁂⁂ _ȧb_, like the Greek καρδία, κραδίη, (δία τὸ
ἀπαύστως σαλεύεσθαι) with κραδάω and κραδαίνω. Other Indo-European
names, our own _heart_, the Latin _cor_ (_cord-is_), the Sanskrit _hṛd_,
and the corresponding Slavonic and Lithuanian names have the same
origin.

From the orthography of ⁂⁂ it seems to have been connected in
popular opinion with its position in the anterior part of the body. And
from various uses of the word it appears to denote not merely the heart,
but the heart with all that is attached to it, especially the _lungs_
which embrace it. It is for instance to the ⁂⁂ that _air_ is
conducted according to the medical Papyri. And it is not improbable that
⁂⁂⁂ and ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, organs of respiration, are
closely connected words.

But perhaps the best argument may be found in the Vignettes of chapter
28, where the two lungs are actually drawn as in the hieratic papyrus
(Pl. 2) published by Sir Charles Nicholson. In others (as Leyden, T. 16)
even the larynx is visible. (See Plate X.)

The Italian word _corata_ is immortalised through its occurrence in a
memorable passage in Dante (_Inf._, XXVIII), but for want of a better
English term than the butcher’s technical word _pluck_[44] I use the
expression _whole heart_.

2. _But_, ⁂⁂⁂. This is the most frequent reading both in the
earliest and in the latest papyri. But some texts have simply ⁂,
which is certainly a mistake, and others omit the conjunction before the
verb. The sense is not much affected by this omission. ⁂⁂⁂
signifies _if not_, _unless_, _until_, _but_, _but surely_. _Cf._ the
Semitic אִם־לֹא, ܐܷܠܴ, إلَّا

3. _The mead of amaranthine flowers._ ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _ḳaiu_ is the
name of a plant which frequently occurs in the medical prescriptions. It
is also mentioned among the aromatic plants (⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂)
required in the sacred laboratory of Dendera. One of the kinds is named
_ḳaiu_ of the Oasis ⁂⁂⁂. It is identified with the Coptic
ⲕⲓⲟⲱⲩ, _amaranthus_. In several copies of this chapter the name of the
plant is followed by the geographical determinative ⁂, which is
really implied in the context. Was this mythological ‘mead of amaranth’
suggested by the Oasis and its vegetation?

4. This sentence is a repetition (in other words) of the preceding one.
On the title _Erpā_, see _Trans. Soc. Bibl. Arch._, XII, 359. My chief
difficulty about understanding it as compounded of ⁂ and ⁂, and
signifying _keeper of the Pāt_, that is _of the deceased_ (human
beings), is that Seb is essentially the _Erpā of the gods_. _Erpā_ is
one of those titles which cannot be translated without perverting the
sense of the original.

5. This passage is a very frequent formula not only in the Book of the
Dead, as the papyri give it, but in other texts of the same nature; see,
_e.g._, _Aelteste Texte_, 34, 14. The next passage included in [] is an
addition to the original text. It occurs however in some excellent MSS.

-----

Footnote 41:

  ⁂ _ȧb_, ‘heart.’

Footnote 42:

  ⁂ _ḥatu_, ‘whole heart.’

Footnote 43:

  This variant already occurs on the coffin of Amamu.

Footnote 44:

  In late Latin _corallum_, whence the Romanic forms _corajhe_,
  _corata_, _coratella_, _corée_, _couraille_. In _Garin le Loherens_ we
  find “la coraille del cuers.”

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER XXVII.

  _Chapter whereby the Heart of a person is not taken from him in the
                             Netherworld._


O ye gods who seize upon Hearts, and who pluck out the Whole Heart; and
whose hands fashion anew the Heart of a person according to what he hath
done; lo now, let that be forgiven to him by you.(1.)

Hail to you, O ye Lords of Everlasting Time and Eternity!

Let not my Heart be torn from me by your fingers.

Let not my Heart be fashioned anew according to all the evil things said
against me.

For this Heart of mine is the Heart of the god of mighty names(2.), of
the great god whose words are in his members, and who giveth free course
to his Heart which is within him.

And most keen of insight(3.) is his Heart among the gods. Ho to me!
Heart of mine; I am in possession of thee, I am thy master, and thou art
by me; fall not away from me; I am the dictator to whom thou shalt obey
in the Netherworld.

                                 NOTES.

1. There is a great difference here as in so many other places between
the MSS. of different periods. I long ago translated the
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ of the _Todtenbuch_ by _non ignoretur a vobis_,
M. de Rougé, after me, by _non renuatur a vobis._ But M. Naville pointed
out the fact that in some of the oldest MSS. the particle ⁂ did not
occur. It now appears that the particle is not found in any of the older
MSS., and I have also found it omitted in hieratic papyri. The passage
therefore must be translated differently, and this is possible through a
slight change in the interpretation of ⁂ from _ignorare_ to
_ignoscere_; _ignoscatur illi a vobis_. The pronoun ⁂⁂ which in
the older texts follows ⁂⁂, ⁂ refers to ‘what he hath done’ of
the last clause.

2. _The god of mighty names_ is Thoth, and the later texts read “For
this is the Heart of the great god who is in Hermopolis.”

3. ⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂. According to another reading ⁂⁂⁂⁂
_new_, _fresh_, _young_, _vigorous_.

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER XXVIII.

  _Chapter whereby the Heart of a person is not taken from him in the
                             Netherworld._


O Lion-god!

I am Unbu(1.), and what I abominate is the block of execution.

Let not this Whole Heart of mine be torn from me by the divine
Champions(2.) in Heliopolis!

O thou who clothest(3.) Osiris and hast seen Sutu:

O thou who turnest back after having smitten him, and hast accomplished
the overthrow:

This Whole Heart of mine remaineth weeping over itself in presence of
Osiris.

Its strength proceedeth from him, it hath obtained it by prayer from
him.

I have had granted to it and awarded to it the glow of heart at the hour
of the god of the Broad Face, and have offered the sacrificial cakes in
Hermopolis.

Let not this Whole Heart of mine be torn from me.(4.) It is I who
entrust to you its place, and vehemently stir your Whole Hearts towards
it in Sechit-hotepit and the years of triumph over all that it abhors
and taking all provisions at thine appointed time from thine hand after
thee.

And this Whole Heart of mine is laid upon the tablets(5.) of Tmu, who
guideth me to the caverns of Sutu and who giveth me back my Whole Heart
which hath accomplished its desire in presence of the divine Circle
which is in the Netherworld.

The sacrificial joint and the funereal raiment, let those who find them
bury them.(6.)

                                 NOTES.

1. _Unbu_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂ is one of the names of the solar god, the
offspring (_Todt._, 42, 19) of Nu and Nut. As a common noun the word
_unbu_ means the Hawthorn or some other kind of flowering bush. This god
is called ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ ‘the golden Unbu’ in the Pyramid Texts
(Teta 39). We have no means of determining the exact sense of this word,
which as an appellative expresses an attribute possessed both by the Sun
and by the fruit, foliage, or other parts of the tree.

2. _Divine Champions._ ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ in the earlier papyri,
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ in the later; and sometimes both readings occur in
the same MS. Such determinatives as ⁂ certainly do not denote very
pugnacious qualities in the divine Champions.

3. _Clothest._ ⁂⁂ is a word of many meanings, and the context
generally determines which is the right one. In the present instance we
have no such help. Some of the more recent MSS. give ⁂, the
determinative of _clothing_.

4. M. Pierret here breaks off his translation of the chapter, with the
note: “La fin de ce chapitre est absolument inintelligible; les
variantes des manuscrits hiératiques ne l’éclaircissent pas.”

Like many other portions of the book this chapter is hopelessly corrupt,
and the scribes did not understand it better than we do. They have
probably mixed up different recensions without regard to grammatical
sense. The deceased addresses gods in the plural ⁂, but immediately
afterwards we have the singular suffix ⁂.

5. _Tablets_ or _records_. ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ See _Zeitschr._,
1867, 50. The word already occurs in the Pyramid Texts, Pepi I, 364, in
the sense of _memory_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, ‘his
memory for man and his love for the gods.’

But there is another word, ⁂⁂⁂⁂ (_Denkm._, III, 65 _a_),
which signifies a _stand_ upon which objects are placed.

6. The last words of the chapter were extremely puzzling to the scribes
of the later periods, who altered them in ever so many ways. The older
MSS. read ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.
And this is borrowed from an ancient text, which may be found on the
sarcophagus of Horhotep, line 338. The variants ⁂⁂, ⁂⁂, of
the papyri, and ⁂⁂ of the sarcophagus show that it is the
sacrificial joint which is meant, and not a verb as the scribes of a
later period thought. For this verb they had to discover an object and
accordingly we find ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ ‘I trod _their
caverns_.’ ⁂⁂⁂⁂ was in like manner converted into a verb.
See the introductory note to chapter 29.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER XXIX.

 _Chapter whereby the Heart of a person may not be taken from him in the
                              Netherworld._


Back thou Messenger(1.) of thy god! Art thou come to carry off by
violence(2.) this Whole Heart of mine, of the Living XYZZY(3.) But I
shall not surrender to thee this Heart of the Living. The gods have
regards to my offerings and fall upon their faces, all together, upon
their own earth.

                                 NOTES.

The two most ancient copies of this chapter are found upon the coffins
of Amamu, Plate XXX, and of Horhotep, _Mission Arch. Française au
Caire_, t. 1, p. 157, lines 335-337. The papyrus of Ani is the only one
of the early period in which it occurs. None of these texts is perfect.
A part of the text of Amamu has been destroyed, but there remains enough
to show that Horhotep has omissions. And in the text of Ani the word
⁂⁂⁂ has slipped in from the 28th chapter, and is entirely out
of place where it now stands.

The scribes of a later period had to exercise their ingenuity on the
subject. They changed ⁂⁂⁂ _ḫenṭu_ into ⁂⁂⁂⁂ _ḫenȧ_,
and this being itself a disagreeable word, they prefixed to it a
negative ⁂ or ⁂⁂⁂.

1. _Messenger_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂, a word used here and elsewhere in
religious texts in the same sense as מַלְאָךְ an angel, ambassador of
God. The later texts have ⁂⁂⁂ ‘every god,’ by the change of
⁂ into ⁂.

2. _By violence_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. _Cf._
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, Harris Papyrus, 500, _verso_.

3. _The Living_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ and saved, in opposition to
the Dead and damned. This plural form is a mere sign of a common noun.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER XXIXB.

            _Another Chapter of the Heart; upon Carnelian._


I am the Heron, the Soul of Râ, who conduct the Glorious ones to the
Tuat.

It is granted to their Souls to come forth upon the Earth to do
whatsoever their Genius willeth.

It is granted to the soul of the Osiris _N_ to come forth upon the Earth
to do whatsoever his Genius willeth.

                                 NOTE.

Certain chapters having reference to the Heart were written upon
gems[45] and served as amulets, the 26th upon Lapis-lazuli, the 27th
upon green Felspar, the 30th upon Serpentine, and the foregoing chapter
upon Carnelian.

M. Naville has called this chapter 29B, as marking its natural place in
the Book of the Dead. It is not often found in the Papyri. M. Naville
found one copy in the Berlin Papyrus of Nechtuamen, and another traced
by Lepsius in Rome from a papyrus now lost. A third copy will be found
in the papyrus of Ani[46] in the British Museum. It differs from the two
others in “conducting the _gods_ to the Tuat,” and by omitting some
words for which there was no room in the space provided.

-----

Footnote 45:

  See a charming article by Professor Ebers in the _Zeitschrift_ of
  1880, entitled “Einige inedita.”

Footnote 46:

  Pl. 33.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER XXXA.

 _Chapter whereby the Heart of a person is not kept back from him in the
                              Netherworld._


Heart mine which is that of my Mother,

Whole Heart mine which was that of my coming upon Earth,

Let there be no estoppel against me through evidence; let not hindrance
be made to me by the Divine Circle;(1.) let there not be a fall of the
scale(2.) against me in presence of the great god, Lord of Amenta.

Hail to thee, Heart mine; Hail to thee, Whole Heart mine, Hail to thee,
Liver(3.) mine!

Hail to you, ye gods who are on the side lock, conspicuous by your
sceptres,(4.) announce my glory to Râ and convey it to Nehebkau.

[And lo, though he be buried in the deep deep Grave, and bowed down to
the region of annihilation, he is glorified there(5.).]

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER XXXB.


Heart mine which is that of my Mother,

Whole Heart mine which is that of my birth,

Let there be no estoppel against me through evidence, let no hindrance
be made to me by the divine Circle; fall thou not against me in presence
of him who is at the Balance.

Thou art my Genius, who art by me, the Artist(6.) who givest soundness
to my limbs.

Come forth(7.) to the bliss[47] towards which we are bound;

Let not those Ministrants(8.) who deal with a man according to the
course of his life(9.) give a bad odour to my name.

Pleasant for us, pleasant for the listener, is the joy of the Weighing
of the Words.

Let not lies be uttered in presence of the great god, Lord of the
Amenta.

Lo! how great art thou [as the Triumphant one.(10.)

                                 NOTES.

This chapter is found not only on papyri but upon innumerable scarabs.
The differences of text are very great, but the principal ones may be
considered as represented by M. Naville’s 30A and 30B. They branch off
from each other after the mention of the Balance.

The oldest copy known on a scarab is that of King Sebak-em-saf of the
XIIIth dynasty. It is in the British Museum (No. 7876) and has been
described by Dr. Birch in his study[48] of the “Formulas relating to the
heart.” “This amulet,” he says, “is of unusual shape; the body of the
insect is made of a remarkably fine green jasper carved in shape of the
body and head of the insect. This is inserted into a base of gold in
shape of a tablet.... The legs of the insect are ... of gold and carved
in relief.... The hieroglyphs are incised in outline, are coarse, and
not very legible.”

1. _The Divine Circle_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. This word on the scarab of
Sebak-em-saf is written ⁂⁂⁂, which shows that ⁂ (a wall of
enclosure) is ideographic of the whole word. And this sign in hieratic,
when placed upright ⁂, has given rise to the ⁂, which takes its
place in the later texts.

2. _Fall of the scale_, ⁂⁂⁂ = the Coptic ⲣⲓⲕⲓ ⲛ̀ⲟⲩⲙⲁϣⲓ or the
Greek ῥοπὴ τοῦ ζυγοῦ.

3. _Liver_; This seems to be the real meaning of ⁂⁂⁂.

4. These gods are mentioned in the Pyramid Texts in a passage closely
resembling this one of the Book of the Dead. “They bring to Unas (line
479) the four Glorious ones who are on the side lock of Horus; who stand
upon the Eastern side of Heaven, and who are conspicuous through their
sceptres ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. They announce to Râ the glorious name of
Unas, and proclaim (⁂⁂⁂, _cf._ ⲟⲩⲱ, ⲉⲣⲟⲩⲱ) Unas to Neheb-kau.”
The text of Teta is very imperfect in this place.

The word ⁂⁂ appears to have the sense of _insignire_, _designare_.
This sense is a key to every passage in which the word occurs.

5. The few early copies of this paragraph are too fragmentary and too
contradictory to furnish a restoration of the text, which must have
meant something like what is expressed in this translation.

6. _The Artist_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂, which is here a common noun rather
than a proper name.

7. The deceased addresses his heart, and thereupon speaks in the first
person plural, _we_; that is _you and I_.

8. _The Ministrants._ The ⁂⁂⁂⁂ were high officials in the
Egyptian court, but here they minister to Osiris in the Netherworld.
They are apparently the same gods who are addressed in the 27th Chapter
as fashioning the heart of a person according to his deeds when living.

9. The determinative ⁂ shows that ⁂ is here to be taken in the
sense of the duration of human life, and the pronominal suffixes ⁂ or
⁂ show whose life is spoken of. The latter suffix has reference to
⁂⁂⁂⁂, which is accordingly to be translated in the singular.
The plural sign merely indicates a common or collective noun.

10. _As the Triumphant one._ So _Aa_, the papyrus of Nebseni. Another
authority (B.M. 7865) quoted by Dr. Birch has ⁂⁂⁂⁂ like Râ,
the Triumphant One.

The formula “How great art thou!” occurs in other primitive texts; _cf._
_Aelteste Texte_, Pl. 5, lines 7 and 8. In line 8 it occurs twice.

-----

Footnote 47:

  ⁂⁂⁂⁂.

Footnote 48:

  _Zeitschr._, 1870. p. 32.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER XXXI.

 _Chapter whereby the Crocodiles are repulsed who come to carry off the
           Words of Power from a person in the Netherworld._


Back, in retreat! Back, Crocodile Sui! Come not against me, who live by
the Words of Power.(1.)

I utter(2.) that Name of the great god, who granteth that two of his
Messengers[49] should come; the name of one is Batta(3.), and the name
of the other is _Thine Aspect is Fixed Law_.(4.)

Heaven determineth(5.) its hour; my Word of Power determineth all that
which concerneth it; and my mouth determineth my Word of Power. I eat,
and my teeth are like flint, and my grinders are like the Cliff of
Tuf.(6.)

O thou who art sitting(7.) with a watchful eye against this my Word of
Power; do not thou carry it off, O Crocodile who livest by thine own
Word of Power.

                                 NOTES.

This chapter is but rarely found in the more ancient collections. It was
on the coffin of Queen Mentuhotep, but M. Naville gives the readings of
only two early papyri. The later recensions add a text which we shall
find later on in chapter 69, and which has no connection whatever with
the present chapter.

1. The Words of Power are supplied to the deceased by Thoth in chapter
23.

2. The Turin text and those which agree with it read “Do not thou
utter,” as if the Crocodile were about to use the Word of Power. I read
⁂⁂⁂⁂. The ⁂ was first corrupted into ⁂, and ⁂⁂
was farther improved into ⁂⁂⁂, which in its turn necessitated
the addition of a suffix of the second person.

3. This name was changed in the later texts to the more familiar one of
the divine Ape ⁂⁂ _Benit_.

4. _Fixed Law_, ⁂ or ⁂⁂. The central idea of theology in the
Book of the Dead is that of _Regularity_, whether in permanence or
change. Those things alone are divine which abide unceasingly or which
recur in accordance with undeviating _rule_.

5. _Determineth._ The word ⁂⁂ here, as in other places, has the
sense of circumscribing, as in a circuit ⁂⁂, prescribing the
limits, fixing and determining.

6. _The Cliff of Tuf_ ⁂⁂, literally ‘his cliff,’ namely of Anubis,
in allusion to his frequent title ⁂⁂.

7. _Sitting._ Here I follow _Pc_ and the papyri generally in reading
⁂⁂. The scribe of _Ca_ seems to have been thinking of
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ of a well-known magic text
(Unas, 320).

-----

Footnote 49:

  See chapter 21, 1.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER XXXII.

 _Chapter whereby the Crocodiles are repulsed who come to carry off the
         Words of Power from the glorified in the Netherworld._


Osiris standeth up upon his feet;(1.) his company of gods raise him up.

O Son who conversest with thy father, do thou protect this Great one
from these four(2.) crocodiles here who devour the dead and live by the
Words of Power.

I know them by their names and their way of living, and it is I who
protect his own father from them.

Back, thou Crocodile of the West, who livest on the Setting Stars.(3.)
What thou execratest is upon me. Thou hast devoured the head of Osiris,
but I am Rā.(4.)

Back, thou Crocodile of the East, who livest upon those who devour their
own foulness. What thou execratest is upon me. I have come, and I am
Osiris.

Back, thou Crocodile of the South, who livest upon impurities. What thou
execratest is upon me. Let not the red flame be upon thee. For I am
Septu.(5.)

Back, thou Crocodile of the North, who livest upon that which lieth
between the hours(6.). What thou execratest is upon me. Let not thy
fiery water be inflicted upon me. [For I am Tmu.(7.)]

All things which exist are in my grasp, and those depend upon me which
are not yet.

I am arrayed and equipped with thy Words of Power, O Rā; with that which
is above and with that which is below me.

I have received increase of length and depth, and fulness of breathing
within the domain of my father, the Great one.

He hath given to me that beautiful Amenta in which the living are
destroyed. But strong is its possessor though he faint in it daily.

My face is unveiled, and my heart is in its place.

The Uræus is upon me daily.

I am Rā, who protecteth himself, and no evil things can overthrow me.

                                 NOTES.

This chapter is in even worse condition than the one which precedes it.
There are a few scraps of it on a coffin at St. Petersburg which M.
Golenischeff assigns to the earliest period. The only early MS. which is
of any use, _Ba_, the Berlin papyrus of Nechtuamon, is here in a very
mutilated condition, as may be seen on referring to M. Naville’s
edition.

1. _Osiris standeth up upon his feet._ So _Ba_; but the coffin at St.
Petersburg lends its support to the text of Bekenrenef (of the] 26th
Dynasty), which opens the chapter with the name of a crocodile
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. “Let the Great one fall upon his belly”!

2. The ancient text had only four crocodiles, and only four are
mentioned in the text of Bekenrenef. The Turin text speaks of eight; two
for each of the cardinal points. But the Saitic text already has two
invocations instead of one for each crocodile.

3. The sense of this myth is obvious. Every star which _sets_ is
supposed to be swallowed by the Crocodile of the West. It was stated
in note 3 to chapter 15 that the ⁂⁂⁂ are _stars_.[50]
Besides the ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ the _stars which set_
and the ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ the _circumpolar stars_, whose
navigation ⁂⁂⁂ ⲥⲱⲕ is continuous, there are the
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ whose name is very significant.
⁂⁂⁂ and ⁂⁂ have the sense of _turning back_,[51] and
the only stars whose apparent motion is ever retrograde are the
_planets_.

All these stars are supposed as divinities to aid in the navigation of
the Bark of Rā. The Egyptians could not have had a correct planetary
theory (which only became possible through Kepler), but they understood
at least that the motions of the planets were _regular_, and that they
depended upon the Sun. Eudoxus is reported to have derived the data for
his theory from his Egyptian instructors.

4. Instead of Rā the name of Sut is found in the later texts. Bekenrenef
has ⁂⁂.

5. _Septu_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂, the ‘armed,’ one of the
Solar appellations, already found in the Pyramid texts (_Unas_, 281). He
appears in chapter 130, 7, in connection with the block of execution.

6. The text is here hopelessly corrupt. M. Pierret has ‘offrande,’ which
he most probably derives from ⁂⁂⁂ or ⁂⁂⁂, a reading
found in some papyri. But _Ba_, our oldest authority, has ⁂⁂, and
Bekenrenef has ⁂⁂⁂⁂. The Turin copy has ⁂; and the
context does not help us. Of these four readings (and there are probably
others which I do not know) that of Bekenrenef seems to me the best; but
⁂ has so many possible applications that I will not venture to
suggest one.

7. [I am Tmu.] These words are not in _Ba_, but they occur in all other
copies, and the omission of the divine name which stops the crocodile is
an evident fault.

The chapter ends here, and what follows is an addition for which our
earliest authority is that of Bekenrenef. But even this text is already
corrupt, and requires to be corrected by more recent ones.

-----

Footnote 50:

  ⁂⁂⁂⁂ as a feminine noun and proper name occurs in the
  Pyramid Texts (Unas, 644).

Footnote 51:

  Brugsch has produced excellent evidence for the supposition that
  ⁂⁂⁂⁂ or ⁂⁂⁂ signifies _the two turnings_
  of the Sun, that is at the solstices, ⁂⁂ being the southern
  solstice and ⁂⁂ the northern.

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER XXXIII.

             _Chapter whereby all Serpents are kept back._


Oh serpent Rerek, advance not! Here are the gods Seb and Shu!

Stop! or thou shalt eat the rat which Rā execrateth, and gnaw the bones
of a putrid she-cat.

                                 NOTE.

This chapter is often found in coffins. There is a chapter much
resembling it in the tomb of Horhotep (line 364), at least as regards
the opening words. It addresses Rerek and tells him that Shu and another
deity are coming, and that the speaker is Horus. No allusion, however,
is made to the dead rat and cat. These typify the impurities and
abominations to which the damned are liable in the world to come.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER XXXIV.

    _Chapter whereby a person is not devoured by the dweller in the
                              shrine._(1.)


O Uræus! I am the Flame which shineth, and which openeth out
eternity,(2.) the column of Tenpua(3.) [_otherwise said_--the column on
which are blossoming plants.]

Away from me! I am the Lynx goddess.(4.)

                                 NOTES.

1. It is not possible to say what is here actually meant by ⁂⁂⁂
_ḥat._ Every word almost in this tiny chapter was a puzzle to the
Egyptian scribes, who altered the text in a hundred ways. The Turin text
provides against the persons being _bitten by the Eater of the head_,
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, instead of ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ as even Bekenrenef
has it.

2. _Open out Eternity_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂. This is the oldest and most
approved reading even in later times. But in _Pe_ the flame ‘shineth on
the brow of the Glorified ones.’

3. A quite unknown deity and most probably a mere blunder. The MS. which
contains it, _Ca_, suggests another reading _Tenpua_ with ⁂, the
determinative of _plants_. This not proving satisfactory,
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _renpit_ was substituted. But all this was mere
conjectural emendation.

4. _The Lynx goddess_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂ Maftit. The name of this deity
is generally translated Lynx, and it is certainly applied to an animal
of the feline species closely resembling the cat. But the notion
expressed by the name is that of _swift speed_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂. (See
Dümichen, _Rec._ IV, 100, where this verb is in parallel with others of
the same sense.)

This deity is again mentioned in the 39th chapter as taking part in the
conflict with the dragon of darkness, and it is named in the strange
magic formulæ already found in the Pyramid texts. She is called
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ (Teta 310), and she apparently defends the
deceased (_ib._, l. 303) against two serpent divinities, one of whom at
least, ⁂⁂⁂ _T’eser-ṭepu_ (_praeclaro capite_), is known to us
as one of the forty-two assessors of Osiris (_Todtenbuch_, 125-33).

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER XXXV.

    _Chapter whereby the person is not devoured by a Serpent in the
                             Netherworld._


Oh Shu, here is Tattu, _and conversely_, under the wig(1.) of Hathor.
They scent(2.) Osiris.

Here is the one who is to devour me. They wait apart.(3.) The serpent
Seksek passeth over me.

Here are wormwood bruised(4.) and reeds.

Osiris is he who prayeth that he may be buried.

The eyes of the Great One are bent down, and he doth for thee the work
of cleansing;(5.) marking out what is conformable to law and balancing
the issues.(6.)

                                 NOTES.

The translator of this chapter cannot pretend to do more than give an
accurate meaning to each word. The true sense of the chapter must have
been lost when the earliest copies known to us were written.

1. _Wig_, ⁂⁂. The head-dress of the gods is one of the mythical
forms of representing the light cloud at sunrise or sunset, in which the
deity is _pileatus_.

2. _Scent_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂. The Egyptian word is also used for
_nursing_, _putting to sleep_, probably through influencing the
breathing. The _nose_ as a determinative is used in the different senses
of the word.

3. _They wait apart._ The early MSS. do not agree here in a single word,
and they defy translation. The later MSS. are scarcely less discordant.
⁂⁂ is _to alight_, _rest_, and this must also be the meaning of
⁂⁂. ⁂⁂⁂ is connected with ⁂. ⲛⲉϩ in the sense of
_dispersing_, _separating_.

4. _Bruised_, or _trodden_. There being no rational context it is
impossible to fix the sense of a word like ⁂⁂⁂, which may mean
either _guard_ or _bruise_ by _beating_ or _treading down_.

5. _Cleansing_ ⁂⁂ or ⁂⁂. The result of the process is
certainly _cleansing_, but the operation itself is generally supposed to
be _washing_. This agrees with the Coptic ⲣⲁϩⲧ _a fuller_, of which the
old Egyptian form is ⁂⁂. But ⲣⲁϩⲧ has also the sense of
_beating_, and the operation is in many countries thought to be one of
the most important duties of washerwomen. With this sense of the word I
would connect the names _Rechit_ given to Isis and Nephthys, as
signifying ‘mourners.’ Compare the Greek τύπτεσθαί τινα, κόπτεσθαί τινα,
_to mourn a person_, and the Latin _plangere_.

6. _Balancing the issues_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. The first of these
words is unambiguous. ⁂⁂⁂ signifies literally ‘standing,’ like
_status_, or στάσις, and like those words also signifies position,
situation, condition, circumstances, and also the point at issue, the
question to be decided.

A well known passage in Cicero’s _Topics_ (93, c. 35) may be quoted
here: “Refutatio accusationis, in quae est depositio criminis, Graece
στάσις dicitur, Latine _status_ appelletur: in quo insistit, quasi ad
repugnandum congressa defensio.”

Perhaps the passage in chapter 30 B, in which “the divine ministrants
are said to deal with a man” according to his ⁂⁂ may have
reference to the circumstances of his life.

Chapters like this, however worthless in themselves, contain small
fragments highly illustrative of the ideas of the Egyptians at an
extremely remote period.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XII.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XXVIII.
  =Papyrus, Brocklehurst, II.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XXVIII.
  =Papyrus, Musée du
  Louvre, III, 93.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTERS XXVI-XXIX.
  =Papyrus, Berlin Museum, 22.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XXX.
  =Papyrus, Musée du Louvre, III, 93.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XXXI.
  =Papyrus, Musée du Louvre, III, 89.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XXXIII.
  =Papyrus, Leyden Museum, IV.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XXXVI.
  =Papyrus, Leyden Museum, IV.=
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XIII.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XXXVI.
  =Papyrus, Berlin Museum, 2.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XXXVII.
  =Papyrus, Cairo, Bulaq, 21.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XXXVIII.
  =Papyrus, Musée du Louvre,
  Cat. des Médailles.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XXXVIII.
  =Papyrus, Leyden Museum, V.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XXXIX. =Saqâra, Grab 24.=
  LEPSIUS, “Denkmäler,” Abth. III, Bl 266.
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER XXXVI.

              _Chapter whereby the Āpshait is kept back._


Away from me, thou with parted lips! I am Chnemu, the Lord of Shennu,
who am bringing the words of the gods to Rā. And I announce the news to
Nebes.

                                 NOTE.

The insect called ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _āpšai_ or ⁂⁂⁂ _āpsȧit_
is difficult of identification. It is certainly not a tortoise as was
formerly thought, but looks rather like the voracious _Blatta
orientalis_. The form in _Le_ is peculiar, but I have met it in a later
papyrus. The last word of the chapter is doubtful. The most recent
papyri have ⁂⁂ ‘their Lord,’ which gives a very good sense, but
even the Turin copy has ⁂ ‘her Lord’ which agrees with the oldest
papyrus. Bekenrenef has ⁂⁂ _Nebes_, a lion-headed goddess.

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER XXXVII.

          _Chapter whereby the Merta goddesses are kept back._


Hail ye Pair of goddesses Merta, Sister Pair, Merta!(1.) I inform you of
my Words of Power.

It is I who rise up from the Sektit boat. I am Horus the son of Isis,
and I am come to see my father, Osiris.

                                 NOTE.

1. The _Pair of goddesses_ consists of Isis and Nephthys
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, _Rehetȧ_, as the word is written at Denderah.
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, _Mertȧ_ signifies _two eyes._

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER XXXVIII.

 _Chapter whereby one liveth by the breath of air in the Netherworld, and
                           keepeth back Merta._


I am the god in Lion form; the heir of Râ and Tmu in Chemmis,(1.) the
Master in their halls.

Those who are in their cells(2.) accompany me as guides. I have made my
way and gone round the heavenly Ocean on the path of the Bark of Râ, and
standing on the girders[52] of the Bark of Râ.

I utter his words to the men of the present generation[53] and I repeat
his words to him who is deprived of breath.(3.)

I spy out for my father Râ at sunset, compressing my mouth,(4.) and
feeding upon life.

I live in Tattu, and I repeat my life after death like the Sun daily.

                                 NOTES.

There are two recensions of this chapter, and both are found in the
papyrus _Lb_. They are called by M. Naville, 38A and 38B. The latter is
that adopted as canonical by all the manuscripts of a later date, and is
the one here translated. The other recension is longer, and contains
passages which are also found in other chapters, to which it accordingly
furnishes important variants. It may possibly be older than those
chapters.

1. _In Chemmis._ The name of the place where Isis gave birth to Horus is
in the Pyramid texts written ⁂⁂⁂⁂ (Pepi I, 428), and
⁂⁂⁂ (Merenra I, 683), _aḫ-ḫebit_ or _ḫebit-aḫ_; but simply
_ḫebit_ in the texts of the eighteenth dynasty, as in the annals of
Thothmes III (Mariette, _Karnak_c pl. 16, line 47),[54] or in the divine
and proper names ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂,
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, and ⁂⁂,
⁂⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂⁂. It is certain therefore that the
sign ⁂ is here only an ideogram of ⁂⁂⁂, not of the ancient
⁂⁂⁂. From the eighteenth dynasty at least, and for a time
belonging to a period of unknown length between the sixth and the
eighteenth dynasties, and for ever afterwards, the name of the place was
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _Ḫebit_, where, as the _Tablet of the Dream_ says,
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ (Mariette, _Mon. div._, pl. 7).

2. _In their cells_: ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. Here 38A has:
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _in their shrines_, followed in
some papyri by ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ “I fraternize with Horus and
Sut.”

3. _Deprived of breath_, ‘the dead.’ In 38A, the privation of breath is
mentioned but in a different connection. But the text of the passage is
uncertain. Here as in chapter 41, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂
‘the Breathless one’ is Osiris.

4. _Compressing my mouth_: ⁂⁂⁂⁂ is the ancient reading, not
⁂⁂⁂⁂, as in the more recent texts. The same observation
applies to the name of the god in chapter 125, 15.

-----

Footnote 52:

  ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

Footnote 53:

  _The men of the present generation, the Reḫit._

Footnote 54:

  Here the king is compared to the god called
  ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ and in the next line ⁂⁂⁂. And
  Thothmes IV (_Denkm._, III, 63) is compared
  ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER XXXIX.

  _Chapter whereby the Serpent Rekrek is repulsed in the Netherworld._


Back! down with thee, stabber(1.) from Apepi! Drown in the lake of
Heaven, in the spot wherein thy father ordered that thy murder should be
carried out. Away from this birth-place of Râ, the god encompassed
by[55] his terrors.

I am Râ, encompassed by his terrors.

Back! the dark demon and the sword which he maketh to flash!

Râ flingeth down thy words; thy face is twisted round by the gods; thy
whole heart is torn out by the Lynx goddess; chains are flung upon thee
by the Scorpion goddess; and slaughter is dealt upon thee by Maāt.

The gods who are on the roads overthrow thee.

Apep falleth down, the enemy of Râ.

O thou who removest the bolt from the East of Heaven at the stormy voice
of bellowings, and openest the gates of the Horizon before Râ: he cometh
forth fainting from the wounds.

I am a doer of thy will, I am a doer of thy will, O Râ.

I have done well, I have done well; I have done to the satisfaction of
Râ.

And I raise shouts of acclamation at thy success at fettering, O Râ.
Apep is fallen and is in bonds.

The gods of the South, the North, the West and the East bind him; their
bonds are upon him. Aker(2.) overthroweth him, and the lord of the ruddy
sky doth bind him.

Râ is satisfied; Râ is satisfied; Râ maketh his progress peacefully.

Apep falleth; Apep goeth down; the enemy of Râ. And more grave for thee
is the proof(3.) than that sweet proof through the Scorpion goddess,
which she practised for thee, in the pain which she suffered...(4.).

Be thou emasculate, O Apep, enemy of Râ; be thou repulsed whom Râ
hateth; look behind thee: a chopper is over thy head to divide it into
two parts, and those who are above thy head assail it. Thy bones are
broken, thy limbs are severed under the direction of Aker, O Apep, enemy
of Râ.

Thy boatmen [O Râ], succeed in measuring out thy path, and a journey,
with which thou art satisfied; a progress, a progress towards home; and
the progress which thou hast made towards home is a fair progress.

Let no evil hindrances come forth against me from thy mouth in what thou
doest towards me.

I am Sutu, who causeth the storms and tempests, and who goeth round in
the Horizon of Heaven, like to one whose heart is veiled.

Tmu saith: Let your countenances be raised up, ye soldiers of Râ, and
drive back Nebtu in presence of the Divine Circle.

Seb saith: establish those who are upon their thrones in the middle of
the Bark of Chepera; seize your shields and spears, and hold them in
your hands.

Hathor saith: Seize your daggers.

Nut saith: Come and drive back Nebtu, who cometh against him who
dwelleth in his shrine, and maketh his voyage in solitary guise: the
Inviolate god, the resistless one.

O ye gods in your Divine cycles, who travel round the lake of Emerald,
come and defend the Great one who is in the shrine from which all the
Divine cycle proceedeth. Let glory be ascribed to him, and let honour be
given to him. Oh then, proclaim him with me.

Nut saith, the mother of the gods: He cometh forth and findeth his path,
and maketh captures of the gods; he hath the first place in the two
houses of Nut.

Seb standeth still, the great cycle of the gods is in terror, Hathor is
under terror, and Râ is triumphant over Apep.

                                 NOTES.

The extreme uncertainty of the text is such that no translation at
present can be other than conjectural.

1. _Back, down with thee, Stabber._ The first word is clear enough; not
so the two next.

Are we to read ⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂ or ⁂⁂⁂⁂? for each
of M. Naville’s authorities gives a different word. The last of these
readings has some support in a subsequent passage, but almost all copies
have ⁂⁂⁂. There has evidently been a confusion between ⁂⁂
and ⁂⁂, and the determinative ⁂ of the latter word has been
transferred to the first. I believe that the true word is ⁂⁂⁂
which is used in the ancient forms of conjuration (see the texts of
Unas, 304, 311, 542, 545, 554, _etc._). It is always used in expressions
of _lying down_ or _falling down_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂,
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, and it is also found in parallelism with
⁂⁂⁂.

⁂⁂ without a determinative is susceptible of different meanings,
and the very recent texts have it written with the determinative of
motion ⁂ or ⁂, as significant of retreat. But the oldest
determinative in this place is ⁂, and this inclines me to identify
the word with ⁂⁂⁂, and translate it ‘stabber.’ But this is mere
conjecture. See note 5 on chapter 40.

2. _Akar._ The older MSS. differ hopelessly from each other as to the
name of the god.

In order to understand the nature of the god ⁂⁂⁂ _Akar_, we
have to imagine a _tunnel_ starting from the spot where the sun sets,
and _extending through the earth_ as far as where the sun rises. Each
end of the tunnel has a sphinx-like form. A human-headed lion stands at
the entrance and also at the terminus. It is through the paws of this
double sphinx that the galley of the Sungod enters on the Western
horizon and comes out on the Eastern.

In the picture Plate XV, taken from the tomb of Rameses IV, ⁂⁂,
_Fair Entrance_, is written at one end of the tunnel; ⁂⁂, _Fair
Exit_, at the other. As the solar bark could not be represented inside
the dark tunnel, it is placed above.

3. _The proof._ Lit. _the taste_, ⁂⁂ _ṭepit_, with the tongue as a
determinative, in the sense of a _probe_. The hand of an Egyptian hero
is said to _taste_ his enemy. In the Bremner Papyrus the god _tastes_
Apep four times. The same conception is found in the Homeric poems,

                                  ἀλλ’ ἄγε, θᾶσσον
              γευσόμεθ’ ἀλλήλων χαλκήρσεσιν ἐγχείησιν.[56]

though in Greek the _taste_ comes generally to the _patient_ rather than
to the agent.

4. This passage, which would be most interesting if we could only get it
accurately, is wretchedly corrupt. It is impossible from the variants to
obtain a text grammatically intelligible. The Scorpion goddess is Isis.

-----

Footnote 55:

  ⁂⁂⁂ _between_, _in the midst of_, _surrounded by_.

Footnote 56:

  _Iliad_, 20, 258.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XIV.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XXXIX. =Sâqara. Grab 24.=
  LEPSIUS, _Denkmäler_, Abth. III, Bl. 265.
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XXXIX.
  =Papyrus, Musée du Louvre, 93.=
]

[Illustration: CHAPTER XL. =Papyrus, Leyden Museum, No. IV.=]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER XL.

          _Chapter whereby the Eater of the Ass is kept back._


Back, serpent Haiu,(1.) whom Osiris execrateth. May Thoth cut off thy
head, and may there accrue to me whatsoever property proceedeth from
thee [according to] what was decreed against thee by the Company of the
gods for the accomplishment of thy slaughter.

Back, thou whom Osiris execrateth, from the Neshemet galley, which
saileth towards the south with favourable breeze.

Pure are ye, all ye gods who overthrow the enemy of Osiris.

The gods upon the larboard utter loud acclamation.

Back, thou Eater of the Ass, whom the god Chas,(2.) who is in the Tuat,
execrateth.

Know me! (_Repeated_ four times).

“Who art thou?”

I am....[57]

Down upon thy face!(3.) thou who art eating at my sanctuary.

I am the Season, which cometh at its own will.

“Come not against me; thou who comest without being called, and who art
unknown.”

I am the master of thine utterance, and the check upon thy pride.(4.)

O Ha-as, whose horns(5.) Horus doth cut: by my children, the cycle of
gods in Pu and Tepit, thou art severed from thy fold and thy fold is
severed from thee.

And he who cutteth thee off cometh forth as the Eye of Horus; thou art
kept back and assailed, and stopped(6.) by the breath of my speech.

O thou god who devourest all wrong, and carriest off with violence;(7.)
there is no wrong in me, my tablets(8.) are free from wrong. Let me not
suffer violence before the Divine Circle; let not disaster be hurled
upon me.

I am he who giveth or taketh according to thy behest.

Let not _N_ be seized, let him not be devoured.(9.)

He is Possessor of Life, and Sovereign Lord(10.) on the Horizon.

                                 NOTES.

The translation of this chapter is based upon the important papyrus T 5
of Leyden, known as _Lb_. This is the only MS. which contains the whole
chapter. All other copies begin after the sixth line. The usual chapter
begins in _Lb_ with a ⁂⁂, which is the ordinary way of indicating
a various reading. But the difference of reading applies rather to a
mere paragraph than to the whole chapter. In this case we should expect
⁂ or something equivalent.

The Eater of the Ass is a Serpent, but who is the Ass?

Here, as in each case of mythological name, the animal is not meant, but
something which is connoted by it. The name of the ass is given to it in
consequence of one of its characteristics. It is ⁂⁂⁂. But this
is one of the seventy-five names of the Sun-god in the Solar Litany.[58]
And he derives this appellation from his fructifying power.

But if the Ass is the Sun, who is the _Eater_ of the Ass? This must be
Darkness or Eclipse of some kind.

1. _Haiu_, the serpent who devours the sun, is undoubtedly the same as
⁂⁂⁂⁂ _Haiu_, the serpent who in the Pyramid texts is ordered
to lie down (Unas, 545, &c.), and cease from his attacks.

2. _The god Chas_, ⁂⁂.

3. The usual chapter begins here. The text of _Lb_ has generally been
followed, but in some places later authorities have been preferred.

4. _Pride_ or _boastings_, ⁂⁂⁂ _ānta_, “glory,” _cf._
_glorior_. The speaker addresses his adversary as being a _miles
gloriosus_.

5. _Horns_ or _barbed hooks_, ⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂⁂ or
⁂⁂⁂⁂. The horns here spoken of, as possessed by a viper, are
those of the deadly Cerastes, which are spines projecting from the
arched eye-brows of the creature. See picture in Long’s _Egyptian
Antiquities of British Museum_, II, p. 316, copied from the great French
work.

But the Sun-god is also called in his Litany[59]
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. And a picture of the god[60] under
the name ⁂⁂⁂ exhibits him as characterized by a pair of hooked
weapons, suggested apparently by the mandibles of a beetle.

6. _Stopped._ There are three important variants here ⁂, ⁂, and
⁂. And the last of these is possibly a corrupt reading from ⁂⁂.
The first two are synonymous. ⁂ may in certain contexts mean
_destroy_, but it only signifies ‘bring to a limit, to an end, stop,’
like the τερ in τερ-μα, _ter-min-o_. It is used in many cases, such as
the staunching of blood, where no destruction is intended.
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ is _stop in thy place_.

7. There is a picture in _Denkm._, III, 279, of the god who carrieth off
with violence ⁂⁂⁂⁂. But it is a mummied form holding the
_T’ām_ sceptre.

8. _Tablets_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. These are the tablets on which Thoth
has written down the evidence taken at the _Weighing of the Words_, the
examination at the Psychostasia. They are mentioned again at the end of
Chapter 41.

9. Here I follow the general authority of the later texts.

10. _Sovereign Lord_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂. This word is closely connected,
and was so from the first, with ⁂ ‘seize.’ The best commentary upon
it may be derived from the legal terms _usucapio_, _saisine_, _seisin_.
The Sovereign Lord of Egypt is in our current legal phrase “_seized_ of
the Two Earths,” that is of the whole Universe, North and South.

-----

Footnote 57:

  There is a lacuna here in the only MS. containing the text. The
  dialogue continues through the next line of the original.

Footnote 58:

  Naville, _La Litanie du Soleil_, p. 49 and 55, with the plates
  corresponding.

Footnote 59:

  In the 64th invocation.

Footnote 60:

  Lefébure Tombeau de Seti I, pl. XVII.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER XLI.

 _Chapter whereby one avoideth the Slaughter which is carried out in the
                              Netherworld._


O Tmu, let me be glorified in presence of the god in Lion form, the
great god; that he may open to me the gate of Seb.

I prostrate myself to earth to the great god who is in the Netherworld.
Let me be introduced into the presence of the company of gods who
preside over those who are in Amenta.

O thou who art at the gate of Tebat; god with the Red Crown,(1.) who art
in Amenta; let me feed, let me live by the breath of air and accompany
the great Cleaver,(2.) and the Bark of Chepera.

Let me speak to the divine Boatman at the gloaming, let me enter in and
let me go out; that I may see who is there; that I may raise him up and
speak my words to him.

O Breathless one:(3.) Let me live and be saved after death.

O thou Bearer of peace offerings, who openest thy mouth for the
presentation of the tablets,(4.) for the acceptation(5.) of the
offerings and for the establishment of Maāt upon her throne; let the
tablets be brought forward, and let the goddess be firmly established.

I am Osiris, the great god, the eternal king, who numbereth his seasons
and who lifted up his right arm, who judgeth the great ones and giveth
mission to the gods of the great Circle(6.) which is in the Netherworld.

                                 NOTES.

The most noteworthy difference between the older recension of this
chapter and that of the Saitic and later periods is that in the latter
the god addressed at the opening is Osiris Unneferu, who is identified
with Tmu. In the older recensions the identification may be seen in
another way. Tmu is the god invoked, and in answer he says that he is
Osiris, the great god.

1. _God with the Red Crown_ ⁂⁂ is ⁂⁂⁂, one of titles of
Osiris with the ⁂ crown. See Plate XV from Lefébure, _Tombeau de Seti
I_, part IV, pl. 34. This title, derived from the crown ⁂⁂, is
_Net-tȧ_ or _Nait-tȧ_. It was borne by the high priest at Coptos
(Brugsch, _Dict. Geogr._, pp. 1374, 1377), and the King of Egypt derived
his title ⁂ from the Crown ⁂ of the North which he wore as
representing Osiris, or rather the _heir_ of Osiris, Horus.

2. _The great Cleaver_, ⁂⁂⁂, the name of the god who cleaves
his path through the sky.

3. _Breathless one_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ Osiris.

4. Thoth is the person here addressed, and the speaker is Osiris. The
tablets are those containing the evidence at the trial at the Balance.

5. _Acceptation_ ⁂⁂⁂ _peḳa_, besides the physical sense of
_comprehendere_, ‘to lay hold of’ with the hands, has that of ‘taking
in, embracing with the mind,’ and perhaps ‘setting forth in words.’

6. On the Sarcophagus of Seti (Bonomi, pl. 3. D), and the
other copies of the same text, there is a picture of these
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. Such is the title written over
them. But the text speaks of them as ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XV.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration:

  =Tomb of Rameses IV.= (Musée Guimet, Vol. XV, Plate 27.)
  CHAPTER XV. Notes 3 and 9.
]

[Illustration: =Tomb of Rameses IV.= (Musée Guimet, Vol. XV, Plate 40.)]

[Illustration: =Tomb of Rameses IX.= (Musée Guimet, Vol. XVI, Plate 6.)]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XLI. Note 1.
  =Tombeau de Seti I.=
  (Musée Guimet, Vol. IX, Plate 34.)
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XLVII.
  =Leyden Papyrus, No. 16.=
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XVI.

                    BOOK OF THE DEAD.  CHAPTER XLII.

[Illustration: =Papyrus du Boulaq, 21.= (Mariette Papyrus, Bd. III.)]

[Illustration: =Papyrus of Ani.=]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER XLII.

    _Chapter whereby one hindereth the slaughter which is wrought at
                            Sutenhenen._(1.)


Land of the Rod, of the White Crown of the Image, and the Pedestal of
the gods.

I am the Babe.(2.) (_Said Four Times._)

O Serpent Abur!(3.) Thou sayest this day, “The Block of Execution is
furnished with what thou knowest,” and thou art come to soil(4.) the
Mighty One.

But I am he whose honours are abiding.

I am the Link,(5.) the god within the Tamarisk,(6.) who connecteth(7.)
the Solar orb with Yesterday. (_Four Times._)

I am Râ, whose honours are abiding.

I am the Link, the god within the Tamarisk.

My course is the course of Râ, and the course of Râ is my course.

My hair is that of Nu,(8.)

My two eyes are those of Hathor,

My two ears those of Apuat,

My nose that of Chenti-chas,

My two lips those of Anubis,

My teeth those of Selkit,

My neck that of Isis, the Mighty,

My two hands those of the Soul most Mighty, Lord of Tattu,

My shoulders those of Neith, Mistress of Sais,

My back is that of Sut,

My phallus that of Osiris,

My liver is that of the Lords of Cher-ābat,

My knees those of the most Mighty one,

My belly and my back are those of Sechit,

My hinder parts are those of the Eye of Horus,

My legs and thighs those of Nut,

My feet those of Ptah,

My nails and bones those of the Living Uræi.

There is not a limb in me which is without a god. And Thoth is a
protection to my flesh.

I shall not be grasped by my arms or seized by my hands.

Not men or gods, or the glorified ones or the damned; not generations
past, present, or future, shall inflict any injury upon me.

I am he who cometh forth and proceedeth, and whose name is unknown to
man.

I am Yesterday, “Witness of Eternity” is my Name: the persistent
traveller upon the heavenly highways which I survey. I am the
Everlasting one.

I am felt and thought of as Chepera. I am the Crowned one.

I am the Dweller in the Eye and in the Egg.

It is an attribute of mine that I live within them.

I am the Dweller in the Eye, even in its closing.

I am that by which it is supported.

I come forth and I rise up: I enter and I have life.

I am the Dweller in the Eye; my seat is upon my throne, and I sit
conspicuously upon it.

I am Horus, who steppeth onwards through Eternity.

I have instituted the throne of which I am the master.

As regards my mouth: whether in speech or in silence, I am right and
fair.

As regards my attributes: I hasten headlong, I the god Unen,[61] with
all that pertaineth to me, hour proceeding from hour, the One proceeding
from the One, in my course.

I am the Dweller in the Eye; no evil or calamitous things befall me.

It is I who open the gates of Heaven; it is I who am master of the
throne, and who open the series of births upon this day.

I am the Babe, who treadeth his path of Yesterday.

I am “This Day” to generation of men after generation.

I am he who giveth you stableness for eternity, whether ye be in heaven
or upon earth; in the South or in the North, in the West or in the
East--and the fear of me is upon you.

I am he who fashioneth with his eye, and who dieth not a second time.

A moment of mine belongeth to you, but my attributes belong to my own
domain.

I am the Unknown one, but the gods of Ruddy Countenance belong to me.

I am the Gladsome one, and no time hath been found, but served to create
for me the Heaven and the increase of Earth, and the increase of their
offspring.

They sever and join not--they sever my name from all evil things,
according to the words which I say unto you.

It is I who rise up and shine forth; strength proceeding from
strength(9.), the One proceeding from the One.

There is not a day devoid of that which belongeth to it; for ever and
for ever(10.).

I am Unbu,[62] who proceedeth from Nu, and my mother is Nut.

O thou who hast set me in motion(11.)! for I was motionless, a mighty
link within the close of Yesterday; my present activity is a link within
the close of my hand.

I am not known, but I am one who knoweth thee.

I am not to be grasped, but I am one who graspeth thee.

[Oh Dweller in the Egg! Oh Dweller in the Egg!]

I am Horus, Prince of Eternity, a fire before your faces, which
inflameth your hearts towards me.

I am master of my throne and I pass onwards. The present time is the
path which I have opened, and I have set myself free from all things
evil.

I am the golden Cynocephalus, three palms in height, without legs or
arms in the Temple of Ptah(12.); and my course is the course of the
golden Cynocephalus, three palms in height, without legs or arms in the
Temple of Ptah.

             _Let these words be said--Âbabak ṭer-ek_(13.).

                                 NOTES.

This chapter is in itself most interesting, and it is one of the most
important as illustrative of Egyptian mythology. It is impossible at
present to explain every detail, but the general drift of the chapter is
not to be mistaken. And the same drift is to be recognised in the whole
course of Egyptian religious literature from the beginning.

The speaker throughout identifies himself with the divinity whose
manifestation is the Sun; he is not the Sun of this or that moment but
of Yesterday, To-day and of all eternity, the “One proceeding from the
One.”

1. _Sutenḥenen._ The later texts say the “Netherworld.”

2. The _Babe_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂, an appellative applied to the rising
Sun. _See_ Brugsch, _Rev._ II, pl. 71, 3, where this babe is
compared to the Lotus coming forth from the great stream
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

The word signifies that which is “lifted up,” “un élève,” ⁂⁂⁂.

3. _Serpent Ab-ur_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. The two important MSS. _Ca_
and _Pb_ seem to imply a female personage, but as the verb in connection
with the name is masculine the final ⁂ cannot be meant for a feminine
ending, and it is peculiar to those two MSS. _Ȧb-ur_ “the very thirsty,”
as the appellative of a viper, recalls that of the διψάς, whose bite
caused intense thirst. But it may have originated in the fact that these
reptiles are in the habit of lying in wait by the water side for the
sake of the animals who come there to drink.

4. _To soil_: ⁂⁂⁂⁂ is the type of the word in the earlier
texts. The late ones have the well known ⁂⁂⁂⁂.

5. _The Link_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂. Another appellative of the Sun god,
applied to Tmu and Horus in the oldest texts. The notion of ⁂ is
that of _concatenation_, _connecting_, _combining_, _fastening_,
_binding_, _setting in order together_, σύνταγμα, σύνταξις, as in
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _nectere coronam_. Hence its occurrence in words
signifying ‘the vertebral column,’ ‘a row of teeth,’ ‘a chain of
hills,’ ‘a body of troops’ (σύνταγμα ἱππέων or πέζων), or their
‘captains,’ literary ‘composition’ ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂
(Pap. Prisse V, 6), and the seven divine ⁂⁂⁂⁂ οἱ
συντάσσοντες, the first authors of artistic composition. See note to
chapter 71.

6. _The god within the Tamarisk._ The rising sun under his various names
is frequently represented as being in a tree or bush, which partly
conceals him. This is a mythological way of treating the light cloud or
mist which so commonly accompanies the sun’s first appearance.
_Tamarisk_ is only a provisional translation of ⁂⁂⁂. The god
Apuat, who is identical with Osiris, is said in the Pyramid Texts
(_Unas_ 107, _Teta_ 66) to come forth from the ⁂⁂⁂.

7. _Who connecteth._ This I believe to be the sense of ⁂⁂⁂ if
the next word is ⁂⁂. But the text is quite uncertain.

⁂⁂⁂ is a _rope_ or _cable_ (Bonomi, Sarc. II, c, 34), and like
the Latin _copula_ or the Semitic חבל, حبل has the sense of _tie_,
_bond_, _connection_.[63]

When the prince of Tennu (_Berlin Pap._ 1, line 31) proposed a family
alliance to Senehat, he said to him ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _lie-toi
avec moi!_ And he gave him his daughter to wife.

In the expression ⁂⁂⁂⁂, _nefrit_ signifies _continuously_,
_connectedly_, and the sense of _until_ is only completed by the
addition of the preposition ⁂.

Instead of ⁂⁂ ‘the Solar orb,’ some MSS. read ⁂⁂⁂,
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂, or ⁂⁂⁂ and in each of these
cases ⁂⁂ must be understood as an adjective raised to the
comparative degree by the preposition ⁂: “More beautiful [my]
splendour (colour, hair or veil) than Yesterday.” None of these readings
seem very attractive.

8. Here follows the identification of the limbs of the deceased person
with those of various gods. There are many similar texts belonging to
all the periods of the Egyptian religion. For the Pyramid Texts, _see
e.g. Unas_, line 218 &c., _ib._ line 570, &c., _Pepi I_, line 565, &c.
Compare the _Coffin of Amamu_, pl. XXIV, line 11, &c., Naville, _Litanie
de Râ_, p. 96, and Golenischeff, _Metternichstele_, lines 9-35.

9. _Strength_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂, literally a _wall_ or _tower_, like the
מגדל־עז of Ps. XI, 4.

10. ⁂⁂⁂ ‘continuously, continuously.’

11. The interjection ⁂⁂ seems to imply that a second person is
addressed. The passage would otherwise be translated, “I have set myself
in motion,” which would be more consistent with the doctrine contained
in this chapter.

12. All the more recent copies have ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, the Sanctuary
of Ptah at Memphis.

13. _Âbaba-k ṭer-ek._ This is only one of the readings of a formula
which had soon become utterly unintelligible to the copyists. Hieratic
copies like _Louvre_ 3079, published by M. de Rougé, B.M. 10,257
(Rollin) and Leyden, T. 16, record several conjectural emendations, to
which modern scholars might add others, were they so disposed.

-----

Footnote 61:

  Another reading is Unneferu.

Footnote 62:

  See note 1 on chapter 28.

Footnote 63:

  “حبل non modo _funem_, sed et in Alcorano saepe _foedus_ significat.”
  Gesenius, _Thesaur in voc._ חבל.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER XLIII.

  _Chapter whereby the head of a person is not severed from him in the
                             Netherworld._


I am a Prince, the son of a Prince; a Flame, the Son of a Flame, whose
head is restored to him after it hath been cut off.

The head of Osiris is not taken from him, and my head shall not be taken
from me.

I raise myself up, I renew myself, and I grow young again.

I am Osiris.

                                 NOTE.

An early recension of this chapter is found in the tomb of Horhotep
(_Miss. Arch. II_, p. 159), and an apparent reference on the _Coffin of
Amamu_.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER XLIV.

             _Chapter whereby one dieth not a second time._


Let the Cavern of Putrata(1.) be opened for me, where the dead fall into
the darkness, but the Eye of Horus supporteth me, and Apuat reareth me
up. I hide myself among you, O ye Stars that set not. My front is that
of Râ, my face is revealed, according to the words of Thoth; my heart is
in its place, my speech is intelligent.

I am Râ himself, I am not to be ignored, I am not to be molested.

Thy father liveth for thee, O Son of Nut! I am thy son Horus, I see thy
mysteries, and am crowned as King of the gods. I die not a second time
in the Netherworld.

                                 NOTE.

1. _Putrata_ ⁂⁂⁂ or ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. This name has
disappeared in nearly all the MSS. It is mentioned in the Pyramid Texts
(_Pepi I_, 332, Merirā 635) as a lake traversed by the glorified
personage.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER XLV.

     _Chapter whereby one escapeth corruption in the Netherworld._


Here is the Osiris _N._, motionless, motionless like Osiris; motionless
his limbs like Osiris--let them not remain motionless, let them not
corrupt. They move not, they stir not: be it done for me as for Osiris.
I am Osiris.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER XLVI.

 _Chapter whereby he that is living is not destroyed in the Netherworld._


Oh ye recent offspring of Shu, who dawn after dawn is possessor of his
diadem at sunrise; ye future generations of men, my springing forth[64]
is the springing forth of Osiris.

                                 NOTE.

This chapter is addressed to the ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _hammemit_,
who are known from other quarters to be _human beings_, as the
younglings of the god Shu. But the reference is not to men who have yet
lived upon the earth. They are spoken of as _men of a future
generation_. Queen Hatshepsu on her obelisk when speaking of them
connects them with the period of 120 years, that is as if we said “men
of the next century.” Before their appearance upon the earth they circle
round the Sun, and the glorified dead hold converse with them (chapter
124, 6).

The Egyptians, like many other ancient nations, held the doctrine of the
preexistence of souls. They held it not like philosophers or poets, but
as an article of their popular and traditional creed.

-----

Footnote 64:

  The _Day-Spring_.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XVII.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

                             CHAPTER XLVII.

[Illustration: =Papyrus of Ani.=]

                               CHAPTER L.

[Illustration:

  =Nicholson Papyrus.=
  (Ægyptiaca, Plate 5.)
]

                               CHAPTER L.

[Illustration: =Papyrus of Ani.=]

                             CHAPTER LVII.

[Illustration: =Papyrus, British Museum, No. 9949.=]

                             CHAPTER LVIII.

[Illustration: =Papyrus of Ani.=]

                              CHAPTER LXI.

[Illustration: =Papyrus du Louvre, III, 93.=]

                             CHAPTER LXIV.

[Illustration: =Papyrus du Louvre, III, 93.=]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XVIII.

                   BOOK OF THE DEAD. CHAPTER LXVIII.

[Illustration: =Papyrus du Louvre, III, 93.=]

[Illustration: LANZONE (Diz. Egiz.).]

[Illustration: =Saquara.= LEPSIUS (Denkm., Abth. III, Bl. 264).]

[Illustration]

LANZONE (Diz. Egiz.).

[Illustration: =Leyden Sarcophagus.=]

[Illustration: WILKINSON (Mat. Hierog., Plate 23.)]

[Illustration: LEPSIUS (Todt., Plate 21).]

[Illustration: LEPSIUS (Todt., Plate 23).]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER XLVII.

   _Chapter whereby the Seat of a person is not taken from him in the
                             Netherworld._


Chair and Throne of mine, which are coming to me and circling round to
me; divine ones!

I am a noble Sāhu(1.), grant that I may become one of those who follow
the great god.

I am the Son of Maāt, and wrong is what I execrate.

I am the Victorious one.

NOTE.

1. _Sāḥu_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ is not a mummy, as it is sometimes
rendered, but a living personality in mummied form.

                  ------------------------------------




                        CHAPTERS XLVIII and XLIX

are identical with X and XI respectively.

                  ------------------------------------




                               CHAPTER L.

   _Chapter whereby one cometh not to the divine Block of Execution._


The four(1.) fastenings of the hinder part of my head are fastened.

He who is in heaven it was who made firm the fastening for him who was
fainting upon his two haunches on that day when the fleece was shorn.

The fastenings of the hinder part of my head were fastened by Sutu and
the company of gods in his first triumph. Let there be no disaster.
Preserve me safe from him who slew my father.

I am seized of the ‘Two Earths.’

The fastenings of the hinder part of my head were fastened by Nu, on the
first time of my beholding the Law in virtue of which the gods and their
symbols(2.) come into existence.

I am the Heedful one, and become the executioner for you, ye great
gods(3.).

                                 NOTES.

The antiquity of the chapter is proved by its occurrence on the second
coffin of Mentuhotep; but its condition there is such that no one can
read it who is not already familiar with it from other sources. It
begins, _Aelteste Texte_, p. 22, line 34, and goes on till the red
letters at line 50. The text, in spite of its importance, is very
inaccurate.

1. _The four fastenings._ The number _four_ is only found in the oldest
copies. The later copies have a different text. It is impossible to say
_what_ kind of fastening is meant. ⁂ might be a ligament or a
vertebra--though more probably the latter. But it might be a combination
of several pieces. ⁂⁂⁂ is the occiput, and this suggests the
hypothesis of cervical vertebrae. But the number of these is not four
but seven. Of these _three_ are peculiar; the Atlas which supports the
head, the Axis upon which the head turns, and the Vertebra prominens
with its long spinal process. But see the Vignette of chapter 42 from
_Pd_ where four vertebrae are figured.

2. _Symbols_, or symbolical representations, ⁂⁂⁂⁂ or
⁂⁂⁂⁂.

3. _The Heedful one_ ⁂⁂, perhaps ⁂⁂⁂, Unas 584, Pepi I,
199 and 667.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER LI.

      _Chapter whereby one goeth not headlong in the Netherworld._


I execrate, I execrate, I do not eat it.

That which I execrate is dirt. I eat it not, that I may appease my
Genius.

Let me not fall into it; let me not approach it with my hands, let me
not tread upon it with my sandals.

                                 NOTE.

The Chapters numbered 51 and 52 are not found in the most ancient
papyri, but the substance of them and their formulas are met with on the
ancient coffins[65] and in the Pyramid texts. See, for instance, Unas
189, Teta 68, with M. Maspero’s note on the latter text. I do not,
however, believe, as M. Maspero does, that these texts convey the idea
“so frequent[!] among half-civilised peoples, of another life in which
the deceased will have nothing to eat and drink but excremental matter.”
That the ⁂⁂⁂ which I translate ‘dirt’ and ⁂⁂ ‘lye’ are of
this nature is quite certain, but they are objects of abhorrence to the
Sun-god, like the dead rat and the putrid cat in chapter 33, because he
is a consuming fire, and “whatsoever he findeth upon his path he
devoureth it,” ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ Unas 515. It is only
natural then that the deceased who is identified with the Sun-god in
these texts should express his execration of such offensive matter. He
is not afraid of being limited to this food, his fear springs from the
opposite extreme.

-----

Footnote 65:

  There is a chapter in Lepsius, _Älteste Texte_, p. 34, with the same
  title as chapter 51, but the contents are different.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER LII.

       _Chapter whereby one eateth not dirt in the Netherworld._


I execrate, I execrate, I do not eat it.

That which I execrate is dirt. I eat it not, that I may appease my
Genius(1.).

Let it not fall upon me; let me not approach it with my hands, let me
not tread upon it with my sandals.

Henceforth let me live upon corn(2.) in your presence, ye gods, and let
there come one who bringeth to me that I may feed from those seven
loaves which he hath brought for Horus and upon the loaves for Thoth.

“What willst thou eat?” say the gods to him.

Let me eat under the Sycamore of Hathor the Sovereign, and let my turn
be given to me among those who rest there.

And let me manage the fields in Tattu and prosper in Heliopolis.

And let me feed upon the bread of the white corn and upon the beer of
the red barley.

And let the forms(3.) of my father and of my mother be granted to me;
the gate-keepers of the stream.

Let room be thrown open for me, let the path be made, and let me sit in
any place that I desire.

                                 NOTES.

1. Here, as in the corresponding passage in the preceding chapter and in
several other places, the later texts often read ⁂, which is a
serious error.

2. The unintelligible ⁂⁂⁂ of the later texts should be
corrected to ⁂⁂ (_Älteste Texte_ 42, lines 50, 54 and 67). The
error may be traced to a form of the word with the prothetic ⁂. There
are several words varying in their applications which may be traced to
the same origin.

⁂⁂ _šeser_ ‘spica’ a point, hence an ear of corn, and ⁂⁂,
⁂⁂, ‘spiculum,’ an arrow, a javelin, are very clearly connected,
and the notion in both is, as in the Hebrew אביב, that of ‘shooting
forth,’ _proferre_, _protendere_.

⁂⁂, a term applied to horned animals, has surely nothing to do
with the Coptic ϣⲣⲱ of Leviticus XV, 19. It refers to the _pointed_
weapons presented by the beasts.

⁂⁂ is ‘put forward’ in the way of speech, and may be command or
prayer, or simple statement.

⁂⁂ the builder’s line is something ‘stretched out’ _prolatum_,
_protensum_.

And with reference to walls, buildings, and the like, ⁂⁂ may
always be translated by _proferre, protendere_.

3. _The forms_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ not ⁂⁂⁂⁂, as the Turin
Todtenbuch. There is a most interesting text but unfortunately imperfect
on the Leyden Coffin M. 3 (M. Pl. 13). The deceased is told that on
arriving at the mysterious gate he will find his father and his mother,
⁂⁂⁂⁂. This is followed by ⁂ and then apparently by ⁂
but the middle sign is almost entirely effaced. This would mean ‘at the
resurrection of thy body.’

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER LIIIA.

     _Chapter whereby one is not made to eat dirt or to drink lye._


I am the sharp-horned Bull, who regulateth the sky, the Lord of the
risings in heaven; the great Giver of Light, who issueth from Flame; the
Bond of Time, richly supplied with years; the god in Lion form, to whom
is given a march of Glory.

I execrate, I execrate, I do not eat that which my Genius execrateth.

Let it not enter into my stomach, let it not approach to my hands, let
me not tread upon it with my sandals.

Let me not drink lye, let me not advance headlong in the Netherworld.

I am the possessor of bread in Heliopolis, who hath bread in Heaven with
Râ, and bread upon earth with Seb.

It is the Sektit boat which hath brought it from the house of the great
god in Heliopolis.

I am gladdened in my very entrails, and am associated with the divine
mariners, who circle round to the East of Heaven. I eat as they eat, and
I feed upon what they feed. I eat bread from the house of the Lord of
offerings.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER LIIIB.

                     _Whereby one eateth not dirt._


I execrate, I execrate! I do not eat it.

Dirt is what I execrate; I do not eat it.

I execrate lye, I do not drink it.

Let me not approach it with my fingers, let me not tread upon it with my
sandals.

Seb, the father of Osiris, hath ordained that I should not eat dirt or
drink lye, but my father hath four times said that I should eat of the
red corn.

There are seven loaves in Heaven at Heliopolis with Râ, and there are
seven loaves upon earth with Seb, and there are seven loaves with
Osiris.

It is the god of the Sektit galley, and of the Mââtit galley, who hath
brought them to me at Heliopolis.

I shout with joy, and my Genius shouteth with joy, because I am in
Heliopolis, and I live in excellent condition before Râ, on the day when
bread is presented in Heliopolis.

                                 NOTE.

Chapter 53A is taken from the papyri of the older period, 53B is a still
older text from the Coffin of Horhotep.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER LIV.

           _Chapter whereby air is given in the Netherworld._


I am the god in Lion-form(1.), the Egg in the Great Cackler, and I watch
over that great Egg which Seb hath parted from the earth(2.); my Life is
the Life thereof, and the same is true of my advance in life and of my
breathing of the air.

I am the god who keepeth opposition in equipoise(3.) as his Egg circleth
round. For me dawneth(4.) the moment of the most mighty one, Sut.

O ye gods who are pleasant through the alternate successions of the
Earth, who preside over sustenance and who live in the Blue(5.), do ye
keep watch over him who abideth in his Nest; the Infant god who cometh
forth towards you.

                                 NOTES.

The text here followed is that of _Pa_ which is much preferable to that
of Ani. There is a far older text, that of Horhotep, line 344 and
_sqq._, but it is too inaccurate to serve as the basis of a translation.
It is however very valuable for other purposes.

1. _The god in Lion form._ These words are not in Horhotep, the chapter
beginning as in later texts “Oh Tmu let there come to me the air which
is in thy nostrils.” The word for air is written ⁂⁂⁂ (lines 344
and 346) as in other places.

2. It is a mistake to speak of a _mundane_ egg, of which there is no
trace in Egyptian mythology. Seb, the great cackling goose, lays the
golden egg, which is the Sun; but ⁂⁂ does not mean ‘lay upon the
earth,’ but ‘_divide_, _separate_ from the earth.’ The egg springs from
the back of Seb.

3. _Who keepeth opposition in equipoise._ This sense may be inferred
from _Pa_, but is made very clear by the ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ of
Horhotep. The equilibrium of forces is maintained by the revolution of
the Sun.

4. _Dawneth_, ⁂⁂⁂, Horhotep; whose text breaks off without a
word on Sutu.

5. _The Blue_, ⁂⁂⁂ ‘lapis lazuli.’ The French _l’azur_ exactly
corresponds to the Egyptian, for the word _azure_ is derived from
_lazulum_.

Ancients and modern differ greatly, as is well known, from each other as
to the impressions derived from colour. It seems strange to read in the
tale of the _Destruction of Mankind_ that the ‘hair of Râ was of real
_chesbet_,’ that is ‘dark blue.’ But we have an exact parallel to this
in Greek. Κύανος is _lapis lazuli_ in Theophrastus, who even mentions
the artificial lapis made in Egypt. But in the Homeric poems the hair of
Hector (_Il._, 22, 401), and the hair and beard of Odysseus (_Od._, 16,
176), as well as the eyebrows of Zeus (_Il._,1, 528; 17, 209) are
described as κυάνεαι.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER LV.

                _Another chapter whereby air is given._


I am the Jackal of jackals, I am Shu, who convey breezes, in presence of
the Glorious one(1.), to the ends of the sky, to the ends of the earth,
to the ends of the filaments of Cloud(2.).

I give air to those Younglings as I open my mouth and gaze with my two
eyes.

                                 NOTES.

1. _The Glorious one._ This is the most usual reading. _Pa_ has Râ.

2. _Filaments of Cloud._ _Cloud_ is the sense, not the translation of
⁂⁂⁂, or, as it is also written, ⁂⁂⁂⁂, which is the
name of some tree or shrub which has not been identified. The
_filaments_ ⁂⁂ or ⁂⁂, which are among its characteristics,
point in this context to the long fibrous forms presented by the cirrus
cloud.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER LVI.

                    _Another chapter of breathing._


Oh Tmu! give me that delicious air which is in thine own nostrils.

It is I who hold that great station which is in the heart of
Heracleopolis.

I watch over that egg of the Great Cackler, my strength is the strength
thereof, my life is the life thereof, and my breath is the breath
thereof.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER LVII.

 _Chapter for breathing air and command of water in the Nether world._


Let the Great One(1.) be opened to Osiris; let the two folding doors of
Kabhu(2.) be thrown wide to Râ.

O thou great Coverer(3.) of Heaven, in thy name of Stretcher(4.) [of
Heaven], grant that I may have the command of water, even as Sut hath
command of force(5.) on the night of the Great Disaster: grant that I
may prevail over those who preside at the Inundation, even as that
venerable god prevaileth over them, whose name they know not. May I
prevail over them.

                         ---------------------

My nostril is opened in Tattu, and I go to rest in Heliopolis, my
dwelling, which the goddess Seshait(6.) built, and which Chnum raised on
its foundation.

If the Sky is at the North I sit at the South; if the Sky is at the
South I sit at the North; if the Sky is at the West I sit at the East;
and if the Sky is at the East I sit at the West.

And drawing up my eyebrows(7.) I pierce through into every place that I
desire.

                                 NOTES.

This chapter and the following are recensions and combinations of
extremely ancient texts.

The first portion of the present chapter follows the ancient text of
Horhotep. Even at that early period two recensions were in existence,
and are copied one after the other. The translation here given is the
nearest possible approach to the original text.

The second portion (beginning with _My nostril_) dates from the papyri
of the Theban period, though we must depend upon later authorities for
the entire Section.

1. _The Great One_ ⁂⁂ _urit_--Heaven.

2. _Kabhu_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, literally the _Cool_ (water) is
another name for the Sky,[66] and is here in parallelism with the Great
One.

3. _Coverer_ ⁂⁂⁂, a name applied both to the Nile, as covering
the land during the inundation, and to the Sky as the covering above us.
_Cf._ my paper on _Nile Mythology_, P.S.B.A., November, 1890.

4. _Stretcher_ ⁂⁂⁂, which I consider as a nasalised (perhaps
the original) form of ⁂⁂ _stretch_. The papyri read ⁂⁂⁂
_āt pet_ ‘Cleaver of the Sky,’ but the word _āt_, without the
determinative ⁂, may also mean _stretch_, as in the expression
⁂⁂⁂.

5. _Force_ ⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂, like the Latin _vis_, may, but
need not, be of a criminal nature. The name of the goddess ⁂⁂⁂
in this place is a manifest blunder of the more recent scribes.

6. The goddess _Seshait_ ⁂⁂ commonly but erroneously called
_Safch_, through an error against which Lepsius (_Aelt. Texte_, p. 3)
and Brugsch (_Zeitschr._, 1872, p. 9) have both spoken. The real name of
the goddess, as I have elsewhere[67] shown by actual variants, is
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _Seshait_ (Teta, l. 268) or ⁂⁂⁂ (Louvre,
A. 97). She is so called from the root ⁂, ⁂⁂, _writing_, that
being one of her occupations.

7. _Drawing up my eyebrows_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, in
scornful pride, superciliously, like the Greek τὰς ὀφρῦς ἀνασπᾶν.

-----

Footnote 66:

  The name occurs repeatedly in the Pyramid Texts, and even the very
  expression ⁂⁂⁂ _e.g._ Unas, 375, and the Litany at Pepi I,
  631.

Footnote 67:

  _On some Religious Texts of the Early Egyptian Period_ in _Trans. Soc.
  Bibl. Arch._, Vol. IX, p. 303.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER LVIII.

           _Chapter for breathing air and command of water._


Let the door be opened to me!

Who art thou? What is thy name?

I am One of You!

Who is with thee?

It is the Merta.

Turn away then(1.) front to front, on entering the Meskat.(2.)

He grants that I may sail to the Abode of those who have found their
faces.

_Collector of Souls_ is the name of my Bark, _Bristler of Hair_ is the
name of the Oars, _Point_[68] is the name of its Hatch, _Right and
Straight_ the name of the Rudder.

The picture of it is the representation of my glorious journey upon the
Canal.

Give me jars of milk and cakes and flesh meat at the House of Anubis.

_If this chapter is known he entereth after having gone out._

                                 NOTES.

The 58th and 122nd chapters are reproductions of the same text, the
earliest copy known being that of Ani.

1. _Turn away then._ Merta as we have seen is the name given to the
goddess pair Isis and Nephthys. It is therefore not possible to account
for the masculine pronoun ⁂ as having reference to Merta. ⁂ must
be taken in the sense of _ideo_, _idcirco_, _then_, _therefore_.

2. _Meskat_, or according to another reading _Meschenit_.

-----

Footnote 68:

  All this part is corrupt.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER LIX.

           _Chapter for breathing air and command of water._


Oh thou Sycomore of Nut, give me of the water and of the wind which are
within thee.

It is I who hold that abode which is in Heracleopolis, I watch over that
Egg of the Great Cackler. My strength is the strength thereof, my life
the life thereof, and my breath the breath thereof.

                                 NOTES.

On the mythological tree in heaven which produces both wind and water,
that is the rain-cloud, see my _Egyptian Mythology, particularly with
reference to Mist and Cloud_, in _Trans. Soc. Bibl. Arch._, Vol. VIII.

The same kind of imagery is still current in Europe. German authorities
tell us about the ‘Wetterbaum,’ which in some places is called
‘Abraham’s Tree,’ in others, ‘Adam’s Tree.’ The Yggdrasill myth is
supposed to have the same origin. The Rainbow is the heavenly Mountain
Ash of a well known Swedish and Esthonian riddle. The water from heaven
was supposed in Egypt to be especially refreshing for the dead.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER LX.

                           _Another Chapter._


Let the doors of Heaven be open to me, let the doors of Kabhu be thrown
wide to me; by Thoth and by Hapi, the great Coverer of Heaven, at
daybreak.

Grant ye that I may have the command of water even as the mighty Sut had
the command of his enemies on the Day of Disaster to the Earth. May I
prevail over the Long-armed ones in their corners,[69] even as that
glorious and ready god prevaileth over them, whose name they know not.
May I prevail over the Long-armed ones.

-----

Footnote 69:

  The four cardinal points; the Eastern and the Western ⁂⁂, and
  the Southern and the Northern ⁂⁂⁂.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER LXI.

                           _Another Chapter._


I, even I, am he who proceedeth from the Weeper(1.), and whose attribute
is Overflowing.(2.) I(3.) have the command of it as Hâpu.

                                 NOTES.

1. The great Weeper is primarily Heaven, and it is so in this place. The
Nile god who proceeds from it also bears the same name.

2. _Overflowing_: ⁂⁂⁂⁂.

3. _I._ The original is in the third person; in reference to “he who
proceedeth,” &c.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER LXII.

          _Chapter whereby water is drank in the Netherworld._


Let the Great One be opened to Osiris; let the Kabhu be thrown wide to
Thoth, the Coverer, Lord of the Horizon in his name of the Divider of
the Earth.

May I have command of the water even as the might of Sutu had over his
enemies.

It is I who traverse the Heaven:

I am Râ:

I am the god in Lion form:

I am the Steer;(1.)

I eat the haunch, and pierce through the joint.[70]

I go round the Sechit-Aarru.

There hath been assigned to me Eternity, without end.

And lo! I am the Heir of Endless Time, and my attribute is Eternity.


                                 NOTE.

1. _The Steer_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂ _smau_, a solar title frequent in the
Pyramid texts. His mother, Heaven, is called ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ or
(as the name is written Teta 359) ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. She is called
the Spouse on the Mountain ⁂⁂⁂, and by a play upon words
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ Unas, 493.

The usual meaning of ⁂⁂⁂, like that of the Greek χλόη or the
Hebrew דֶּשֶׁא, is the light green shoot of plants in spring, and this is
the key to the sense of the proper name. The goddess Demeter had a
temple at Athens under the name of _Chloe_, and it is in allusion to
this that Sophocles calls her εὔχλοος (_Oed. Col._ 1600).

This Egyptian goddess was ⁂⁂⁂⁂, a principal deity at
Enchebit, she had the White Crown and the wig with two plumes. She is
described as having drooping dugs, and as suckling her son. _Cf._ with
this information from Unas the whole chapter beginning with line 283 of
Pepi I.

-----

Footnote 70:

  The sacrificial offerings ⁂ and ⁂.

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER LXIIIA.

 _Chapter whereby one is not burnt with fire, but drinketh water in the
                             Netherworld._


O Bull of Amenta! let me be borne to thee!

I am that Rudder of Râ, wherewith he conveyeth the Ancient(1.) ones.

I am not burnt, I am not consumed.

I am Babai, the eldest son of Osiris, who striketh the eye of every
god(2.) in Heliopolis.

I am the Heir, the primary power of motion and of rest(3.).

I have made firm my name, and have preserved it that I may have life
through it.

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER LXIIIB.

             _Chapter whereby one is not boiled in water._


I am that ready Rudder wherewith Râ conveyeth the Ancient ones, and I
raise the effluxes(4.) of Osiris to the Tank from flames impassable; a
wrecked one,(5.) but not to be consumed.

I lie helpless as a dead person,(6.) and I arrive at the lair of the
Lion who defieth slaughter, ...(7.) following the road by which I set
out.

                                 NOTES.

The Chapters 63A and 63B are united into one in the later MSS. without
any other division than ⁂, indicative of a different reading. None
of the early papyri contains both chapters. The text of 63B is extremely
corrupt, and without rational interpretation.

1. _I am that Rudder of Râ, wherewith he conveyeth the Ancient ones._
This passage is twice found in Horhotep (311 and 329), the word for
Rudder being written ⁂⁂⁂⁂.

2. _Who striketh the eye_, ⁂⁂⁂. The peaceful determinative may
perhaps be intended to diminish the force of the very expressive ⁂ in
the verb of striking. But I believe that this passage may fairly be
illustrated by the words of Lucretius IV, 324 and following:--

            Splendida porro oculi fugitant vitantque tueri,
            Sol etiam caecat, contra si tendere pergas.
            Praeterea splendor quicumque est acer adurit
            Saepe oculos ideo quod semina possidet ignis
            Multa, dolorem oculis quae gignunt insinuando.

3. _The primary power of motion and of rest._ These words have a
modern sound, but they express the sense of the original,
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

4. _Effluxes_, ⁂⁂⁂, the ἰχώρ, the vital _sap_, as it were, of
the body of Osiris, which is the source of life both to men and to
gods,[71] and in default of which his own heart (Unas 12) would cease to
beat. It is celebrated in all the mythological texts extant from the
time of the Pyramids down to the latest inscriptions of Denderah and
Edfu, and even in Demotic documents.[72] All moisture was supposed to
proceed from it, and the Nile was naturally identified with it.

In the Pyramid texts (Pepi 66) ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ is put
in parallelism with ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

5. _A wrecked one._ So I understand ⁂ from Chapter 125, 38, but the
whole context here is so doubtful that no translator who respects
himself would warrant the sense.

6. _I lie helpless like a dead person._ ⁂⁂⁂, _ḥefṭ_ is the
condition of an infant on the knees of its nurse. And I understand
⁂⁂⁂ in its well known euphemistic application to the dead.

7. ⁂⁂⁂ is the most probable reading here, but it is a
_hapax legomenon_ with nothing in the context to explain it.

-----

Footnote 71:

  In one of the ancient chapters preserved in the tomb of Horhotep, the
  deceased, speaking in the person of Horus, talks (319) of quenching
  his thirst with the ⁂⁂⁂ of his father Osiris.

Footnote 72:

  See a very interesting passage in _Pap. Rhind_ 4, 4, with Brugsch’s
  translation.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER LXIV.

    _Chapter whereby one cometh forth by day from the Netherworld._


I am Yesterday, To-day, and To-morrow, for I am born again and again;
mine is the unseen Force,(1.) which createth the gods and giveth food to
those in the Tuat(2.) at the West of Heaven; I am the Eastern
Rudder,(3.) the Lord of Two Faces, who seeth by his own light; the Lord
of Resurrections, who cometh forth from the dusk and whose birth is from
the House of Death.

Ye two divine Hawks(4.) upon your gables, who are giving attentive heed
to the matter; ye who accompany the bier to the tomb, and who conduct
the ship of Râ, advancing onwards from the highest place of the Ark in
heaven--the Lord of the Shrine(5.) which standeth in the centre of the
Earth;

He is I, and I am He.(6.)

Mine is the radiance in which Ptah floateth over his firmament.(7.)

Oh Râ, who smileth cheerfully, and whose heart is delighted with the
perfect order of this day as thou enterest into Heaven and comest forth
in the East: the Ancients and those who are gone before acclaim thee.

Let thy paths be made pleasant for me; let thy ways be made wide for me
to traverse the earth and the expanse of Heaven.

Shine thou upon me, oh gracious Power;(8.) as I draw nigh to the divine
words which my ears shall hear in the Tuat; let no pollution of my
mother be upon me; deliver me, protect me from him who closeth his eyes
at twilight and bringeth to an end in darkness.

I am the Overflower, and Kam-ura(9.) is my name: I bring to its
fulness(10.) the Force which is hidden within me.

Oh thou Great One, who art Shoreless,(11.) and callest upon the Powers
of the South, at the moment when the god is carried forth, saying:--

“Behold the Lord of his Flood; see, the Shoulder is fastened(12.) upon
his neck and the Haunch upon the head of the West” offerings which the
two goddesses of the West(13.) present to me when the weeping bursteth
forth from me at what I witness, as I am borne round on the Tenait in
Abydos,(14.) and the bolts made fast on the gateways(15.) above your
images are in the reach of thine hand and from within thee.

Thy face is as that of a hound whose nostril sniffeth at the covert to
which my feet convey me.

Anubis is my bearer, for he who lulleth me to rest(16.) is the god in
Lion form.

Do thou save me!

I am He who cometh forth as one who breaketh through the door; and
everlasting is the Daylight which his will hath created.

“I know the deep waters” is my name.

I satisfy the desires of the Glorified, who are by millions and hundreds
of thousands....[73] I am the guardian of their interests, actively
working at the hours of the day and adjusting the arms of Sahu; twelve
in circling round, uniting hands, each of them with another. But the
sixth of them in the Tuat is the ‘Hour of the overthrow of the Sebau,’
which cometh here in triumph; the same which maketh way into the Tuat;
the same which is yoked with Shu.

I shine forth as the Lord of Life and the glorious order of this day:
the blood which purifieth and the vigorous sword-strokes by which the
Earth is made one.

I sever the horns(17.) from those who unite in resistance to me; the
hidden ones who rise up in opposition against me; those who go upon
their bellies.

I come as the ambassador of the Lord of lords to avenge the cause of
Osiris in this place. Let not[74] the Eye consume its tears.

I am the Guide of the house of Him who dwelleth in his treasures.

I am come from Sechem to Heliopolis to inform the Bennu of the matters
of the Tuat.

Oh goddess Aucherit, who concealest that is within thee, but raisest up
forms, like Chepera, grant that I may come forth and see the orb of the
sun, and walk forth in the presence of the great god, who is Shu and
abideth for eternity.

I travel on high, I tread upon the firmament, I raise a flame with the
daylight which mine eye hath made, and I fly forward towards the
splendours of the Glorified in presence of Râ daily, giving life to
every man who treadeth on the lands(18.) which are upon the earth.

Oh thou who leapest forth, conductor of the Shades and Glorified ones
from the Earth, let the fair path to the Tuat be granted to me, which is
made in behalf of those who are in faint condition and for the
restoration of those who are in pain.

Who art thou, who devourest in Amenta?

I am He who presideth in Restau. “He who entereth in his own name, and
cometh forth in quest; the Lord of the Eternity of the Earth” is my
name.

She who hath conceived hath set down her burden; _which turneth round
before descending; the door is shut at the wall which is
reversed_....[75]

His Eye hath been given to Horus and his face brighteneth at the dawning
of the day.

I am not exhausted: I become the Lion god and the palm flowers of Shu
are upon me.

I am not one who drowneth.

Blessed are they who see(19.) the Bourne:(20.) beautiful is the god of
the motionless heart who causeth the stay of the Overflowing.

Behold! there cometh forth the Lord of Life, Osiris thy support, who
abideth day after day.

I embrace the Sycomore,(21.) I am united to the Sycomore.

I part the two deities of morning that I may come to hold the Eye,(22.)
and cause it to rest in its place.

I am come to see Râ at his setting, and I unite with the breeze at his
coming forth: my two hands are pure for adoring him.

May I be restored! May I be restored!

I fly up to heaven and I alight upon the earth; and mine eye turneth
back there towards the traces of my footsteps.

I am the offspring of Yesterday; the tunnels(23.) of the earth have
given me birth, and I am revealed at my appointed time.

May I be under shelter from the warlike handed god who cometh behind me,
may my flesh be sound and may my glories be a protection to the limbs of
one who waiteth for the purpose of taking counsel. May the Cycle of the
gods listen to what I say.

_To be said on coming forth by day; that one may not be kept back on the
path of the Tuat, whether on entering or on coming forth; for taking all
the forms which one desireth; and that the soul of the person die not a
second time._

_If then this chapter be known the person is made triumphant upon earth
[and in the Netherworld] and he performeth all things which are done by
the living._

_This chapter was discovered on a plinth of the god of the Hennu Bark_
(24.) _by a master builder of the wall in the time of King Septa, the
Victorious._(25.)

_This composition is a secret; not to be seen or looked at._

_Recite the chapter when sanctified and pure; not approaching women, not
eating goat’s flesh or fish._

                                 NOTES.

This is one of the most important as it is one of the most ancient
chapters. The text of it was already doubtful at the time of the XIth
dynasty. It had been handed down in two recensions, both of which were
inscribed on the coffin of Queen Mentuhotep, the discovery of one of
these being attributed to the time of King Septa of the 1st dynasty, and
that of the second to the time of Menkaurâ, the king of the third
pyramid. These two recensions are also found in the papyrus of Nebseni.
The MSS. present innumerable various readings, few of which are of the
slightest value. These have been collected, as far as they could be
discovered, in the French and some other Museums in 1876, in a very
admirable work upon the chapter, by M. Paul Guieysse,[76] who has
translated and commented upon it and and all the variations of it known
to him at the time. Since then the papyrus of Nebseni has been
published, and M. Naville has given all the variants found in the few
existing papyri of the best period. I have notes of the readings of the
papyri in the British Museum, and also those of a cast (now in the
British Museum) taken from a block in serpentine, belonging to the
Museum of the Hermitage in St. Petersburg.

With such light as could be derived from these extremely divergent
authorities I have done my best (taking as the basis of my translation
the texts in the papyrus of Nebseni and the rubric in which the
discovery is ascribed to the time of king Septa) towards exhibiting the
chapter in as intelligible a form as seems to me possible. Some passages
as yet defy translation in consequence of the corruption of the text.

Some years before his untimely death M. de Rougé read his translation of
this chapter before the Académie des Sciences. It is much to be lamented
that this has never been published. I have, in addition to the versions
of other scholars, a copy of one by Mr. Goodwin, with whom I read this
and other chapters nearly thirty years ago. But this kind of literature
is not one of those in which his marvellous sagacity showed to
advantage.

In reading this and almost every other chapter of the _Book of the
Dead_, it is absolutely necessary to bear in mind that different divine
names do not necessarily imply different personalities. A name expresses
but _one_ attribute of a person or thing, and one person having several
attributes may have several names. It is not implied in this chapter
that the Sun is the Nile or the Inundation, but that the same invisible
force which is manifested in the solar phenomena is that which produces
the inundation; He is the Inundator. But he has many other names and
titles. In this chapter, as in others before it, the speaker at one time
talks in terms identifying him with some divinity, and at another as a
simple mortal petitioning some favour.

1. ⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂⁂ or, at a later period ⁂⁂, signifies
_one whose force is concealed or unseen_. It is a theological term,
frequent at all periods of the Egyptian religion, and implies that the
deity is not to be confounded with its external manifestation. The Sun
that we see _hides_ as truly as it reveals the Sun-god; who, as this
chapter shows, has other manifestations.

2. _Those in the Tuat_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ called in the Pyramid Texts
⁂⁂⁂⁂, Pepi I, 185. The more recent texts read
⁂⁂⁂⁂ “the gods of the West.”

3. _Cf._ Pepi I, 174.

4. _Two divine Hawks upon your gables._ They are mentioned in the
Pyramid Texts[77] as ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, Teta, 183. They represent
the two divisions, North and South, of the kingdom of Horus. _Cf._
Rochemonteix, _Edfu_, p. 55 and many other such passages as that found
there.

5. _The Shrine which standeth in the centre of the Earth._ This Shrine
is also mentioned in the ‘Book of Hades.’ _Cf._ Bonomi, Sarc. 4c.

6. _He is I, and I am He._ _Cf._ the Pyramid Text--“Oh Râ.... Teta is
thou, and thou art Teta...., thou risest as Teta, and Teta riseth in
thee, etc.,” Teta, 337.

7. _Ptah floateth over his firmament._ The meaning of the verb is shown
in early texts by the determinative, as in the parallel passage of the
17th chapter.

8. _Oh gracious Power_, ⁂⁂⁂. The adjective is also written
⁂⁂⁂. The usual determinative ⁂ has its origin in the
hieratic form of ⁂, see Prisse Papyrus.

9. _Kam-urȧ_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂, “The great Extender,” a name applied to
Osiris, as the Nile. “Thy two sisters, Isis and Nephthys, come to thee,
and they convey to thee _Kamit urit_ [the great Extent] in thy name of
_Kam-urȧ_ [the great Extender].” Teta, 274.

10. _I bring to its fulness, etc._ The yearly inundation is the mature
result of the innate force belonging to the god; the ἐνέργημα of his
ἐνεργεία. This translation remains the same whether the reading be ⁂
or ⁂.

11. _Shoreless_, ⁂⁂⁂, ⁂ or ⁂, implies an enclosed space,
a basin or channel with fixed limits. The inundation has no determinate
banks. Its course is from south to north, hence the reference to the
deities of the South.

12. _Shoulder_ and _Haunch_. The usual sacrificial joints. This passage
was at an early date added to the paragraph which opens the chapter.

13. _The two goddesses of the West_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.
It is said of Râ at Edfu ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. “He setteth in the West.”
The deities in question are Isis and Nephthys, who are also the deities
of the East or Sunrise under the name of ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂;
Unas, 461.

In the passage of the Pyramid Texts just referred to it is stated that
these “divinities in _Ununait_ open their arms to the god as he stands
up erect on the eastern side of the firmament.”

_Ununait_ is the place of _rising_, _springing up_.

14. _The Tenait in Abydos._ This feast has already been mentioned in
Chapter I. It was one of those commemorative and representative of the
death of Osiris, of his mutilation, mummification and burial.
Prescriptions for carrying it out are found in the great text at
Denderah, published by Dümichen and Mariette, and translated by Brugsch,
and Loret, and (in part) by Dümichen.

_Tenait_ is also the name of certain days of the month, and (Teta, 229)
of the fifth hour of the day.

15. _The bolts made fast on the gateways._ The Pyramid Texts
on behalf of the deceased invoke the
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, ‘the bolt
which closes the gateway of Heaven,’ with a prayer that it may open to
him (Teta, 235, compare line 200).

16. _He who lulleth me_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. The word is here
in the dual, as corresponding to the double lion. _Cf._
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, Teta 261. The
important variant ⁂⁂⁂ is found at Edfu (Rochemonteix, p. 78).

17. _I sever the horns._ _Cf._ Psalm lxxv, 11.

18. The _lands_. The Egyptian word varies in the texts. The most
authorized reading ⁂⁂ is used in different senses: one of which
(and perhaps the original one) is _put_, _put on_; _ponere_, _locare_,
_induere_, _figere_, _addere_. Here it would seem from the context to
mean locality, post, spot of earth. And I am inclined to identify
⁂⁂ in this place with the well-known ⁂, or ⁂⁂⁂, as an
equivalent if not as a phonetic variant.

19. _Blessed are they who see_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ written
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ in the Pyramid Texts (Unas, 584, Teta, 42,
Pepi I, 181 and 199), where it is in parallelism with ⁂⁂⁂⁂.

20. _The Bourne_, ⁂⁂⁂. On the goddess ⁂⁂⁂⁂,
_Menait_, _cf._ Teta 288, Pepi I, 70, 154, 163.

21. _The Sycomore_ of Dawn repeatedly mentioned in the Book of the Dead.
The Pyramid Texts also (Pepi I, 174) speak of the tall Sycomore of Sut
in the Eastern Sky on which the gods congregate and sit, in expectation
of the arrival of the Glorified one.

22. _To hold the Eye_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. Later texts, like
the Turin copy, have ⁂⁂⁂⁂. The two verbs here (like
⁂⁂⁂⁂ which is also found as a variant) are synonymous in the
sense of _embracing_, _holding_,[78] _enclosing_, _fastening_,
_staying_, _propping_.

According to the ancient myth Sut deprived Horus of his Eye, which was
recovered by Thoth, and by him restored to its owner. The following
passage from an inscription at Edfu (Rochemonteix, p. 25) is in strict
accordance with the oldest mythological texts.

⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂
“Asten, who restored the Eye of Horus to its Lord, who preserved the Eye
(_ut’ at_) from suffering harm, who made fast the Eye (_nutrit_) in its
place, and who pacified Horus with his Eye.” The different synonyms
designating the Eye are important as showing that the word
⁂⁂⁂⁂ is here used in the sense of the _daily_ light of the
sun.

The other part of the same text as Edfu gives additional variants.
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂
and ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. Here the Eye is called ⁂⁂,
⁂⁂, and ⁂⁂. But in other places the _Ut’ at_ stands for a
less frequent moment of the solar progress. In the Pyramid Texts for
instance ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ “holder of the _Southern_ Eye
of Horus” might perhaps designate the Summer Solstice. And a later text
connects the Eye with the opening of the year.

The priestly title ⁂⁂⁂, ‘holder of the Eye,’ is like all such
titles, that of the divinity whom the priest personates. The god himself
is hieroglyphically represented by the sign ⁂⁂ of an ape holding
the Eye.

23. _The tunnels_, ⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂, Teta, 291;
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, Horhotep, 213. See my note _Proc. Soc.
Bibl. Arch._, 1873, p. 385. The Coptic ⲁⲕⲟⲣⲓ, which is generally
supposed to be a serpent, is more probably an _earth-worm_, like
⁂⁂.

The Pyramid Texts have another word which I understand of the
tunnels through which the Sun, Moon, and Stars pass from West to
East, ⁂⁂⁂, as opposed to ⁂⁂⁂, the paths of the
upper world. Anubis is called ⁂⁂⁂⁂ (Pepi I, 80), and
these passages are ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂
(_ib._, 73), “between the two divine forms” (a lion at each end).
_Cf._ Teta, 319, where it is said of the Stars
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂,
that at their triumphant course through the tunnels the bones of
the Akeru gods quake.

24. _The god of the Hennu Bark_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, he who
resides in the ⁂⁂⁂⁂ ship referred to in chapter I. The god
of this ship is commonly named Sekaru in the texts, but Hennu is also
one of the names of Horus. On the connection between the two names see
Teta, line 270.

25. King Septa ⁂ of the 1st dynasty, who has been identified with the
Usaphais of Manetho.

The other account of the discovery of the chapter is thus described in
the rubric of the second recension.

_This chapter was discovered at Hermopolis upon a slab of alabaster,
inscribed in blue, under the feet of this god_ [Osiris], _at the time of
King Menkarā, the victorious, by the royal prince Hortâtâf, when he was
journeying for the purpose of inspecting the temples_ ...[79] _and he
carried off the slab in the royal chariot, when he saw what was on it._

The rubric farther prescribes that a scarab of hard stone encircled and
purified with gold[80] should be placed upon the place of the heart of
the deceased, and that the ‘words of power’ contained in the 30th
chapter, “Heart mine of my mother,” etc., should be repeated. The gold
leaf or plate has been found on some scarabs, but has disappeared from
nearly all.

The ‘Ritual of Parma,’ which speaks of two metals, ⁂⁂⁂ _smu_,
and silver (the latter for the rim), directs that the scarab should be
put at the throat of the deceased. According to this authority it was
the 30th chapter, not the 64th, which was discovered by Prince Hortâtâf
in his inspectorial tour.

-----

Footnote 73:

  The text is too corrupt here for any plausible translation.

Footnote 74:

  _Not_ is omitted in many copies.

Footnote 75:

  The copies of this paragraph are as discordant as they are
  unintelligible. It is idle to guess at the meaning until a better text
  can be discovered.

Footnote 76:

  Etudes Egyptologiques; sixième livraison.

Footnote 77:

  Here as in the name of ⁂ Tmu, the _long_ sign is written first
  though read last.

Footnote 78:

  _Cf._ the expressions ⁂⁂⁂⁂ as, Teta, 258, 262, and
  ⁂⁂⁂⁂.  ⁂⁂⁂⁂ is not a mere _gate_, but
  a _hold_, or _keep_.

Footnote 79:

  There is no certainty about the text of the next few words.

Footnote 80:

  I understand by this that the gold is intended to krep the scarab free
  from defilement.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER LXV.

    _Chapter whereby one cometh forth by day and prevaileth over the
                             adversaries._


Oh thou who shinest forth from the Moon, thou who givest light from the
Moon, let me come forth at large amid thy train, let me be revealed as
one of those in glory. Let the Tuat be opened for me. Here am I: let me
come forth upon this day, and be glorified. Let the glorified ones grant
to me that I live and that mine adversaries be brought to me in bonds
before the divine Circle; may the Genius of my mother be propitiated
thereby, as I rise up upon my feet with a sceptre of gold in my hand,
and lop off the limbs. May I rise up, a Babe [from between] the knees of
Sothis, when they close together.(1.)

                                 NOTES.

The first part of this chapter is nearly identical with Chapter 2. No
copy of it is found in the papyri of the older period. In place of it M.
Naville has published a chapter bearing the same title, and which is
found in five ancient papyri. These texts however are extremely
discordant and corrupt, and in the more difficult, and to us more
interesting, passages must have been quite unintelligible to the
copyists. The second word, for instance, of line 8 is _ri_ in _Ca_, the
corresponding word is .. _ḥtu_ in _Ta_, _ṭāi_ in _Pb_, _rāu_ in _Ia_ and
_ḥti_ in _Aa_. A discrepancy not less violent is encountered after the
next three words. The oldest extant form of the chapter is that of _Aa_,
the papyrus of Nebseni; it is also the shortest, and the other forms
appear to me to exhibit signs of interpolation. But M. Naville was quite
right in taking the text of _Ca_ as his basis for the collation of the
texts.

1. This whole passage, as it stands, in the MSS. is extremely obscure,
and I can only make sense of it by conjecturing that a preposition has
been omitted by the copyists.

The knees of a goddess are frequently mentioned in connection with the
birth of a divinity. Here the Babe is mentioned (_cf._ opening of
Chapter 42), and the closing of the knees. The word _ānḫ_, ‘live,’ has
for its primitive meaning ‘rise up,’ and it is in this sense that I
translate it here.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER LXVI.

               _Chapter whereby one cometh forth by day._


I know that I have been conceived by Sechit and that I am born of Neith.

I am Horus, who proceedeth from the Eye of Horus; I am Uat’it, and I
come forth like the Hawk which soareth aloft and resteth upon the brow
of Rā at the prow of his Bark in Heaven.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER LXVII.

 _Chapter whereby the doors of the Tuat are opened and one cometh forth
                                by day._


Let the doors be opened of the caverns of Nu, and let the feet be
loosened of those who are in glory.

Let the caverns of Shu be opened, that he may come forth at large, and
that I may issue from my funereal pit to my seat which is at the prow of
the Bark of Rā; let me issue without disaster to my seat which is at the
prow of the Bark of Rā, the all-radiant one, as he riseth up from his
lair.

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER LXVIII.

               _Chapter whereby one cometh forth by day._


Let the two doors of Heaven be opened to me: let the two doors of Earth
be opened to me: let the bolts of Seb open to me, and let the First
Mansion be opened to me, that he may behold me who hath kept guard over
me: and let him unloose me who hath wound his arms around me and hath
fastened his arms upon me into the earth.

Let the Re-hunit(1.) be opened to me, let me pass into the Re-hunit; let
the Re-hunit be given to me, that I may come forth by day whithersoever
my heart desireth.

Let me have possession of my heart, let me have possession of my Whole
heart; let me have possession of my mouth, let me have possession of my
legs, let me have possession of my arms, let me have possession of my
limbs absolutely; let me have possession of my funereal meals, let me
have possession of air, let me have possession of water, let me have
possession of the stream, let me have possession of the river, let me
have possession of the banks.

Let me have possession of all things soever which were ritually offered
for me in the Netherworld. Let me have possession of the table which was
made for me upon earth--the solicitations(2.) which were uttered for me
“that he may feed upon the bread of Seb.”

That which I execrate, I eat it not. Let me feed upon the bread of the
red corn of the Nile in a pure place, let me sip beer of the red corn of
the Nile in a pure place; let me sit under the branches of the palm
trees [in Heliopolis] in the train of Hathor, when the solar orb
broadeneth(3.), as she proceedeth to Heliopolis with the writings of the
divine words of the Book of Thoth.

Let me have possession of my heart, let me have possession of my Whole
heart; let me have possession of my arms, let me have possession of my
legs, let me have possession of my funereal meals, let me have
possession of air, let me have possession of water, let me have
possession of the stream, let me have possession of the river, let me
have possession of the barks.

Let me have possession of all things soever which were ritually offered
for me in the Netherworld. Let me have possession of the table which was
made for me upon earth.

Let me be raised up on the left and on the right; let me be raised up on
the right and on the left.

Let me sit down and let me stand up, and strain for the breeze [with] my
tongue and mouth like a skilled pilot.(4.)

_If this scripture is known, he will come forth by day and he will
travel over the earth in the midst of the living, uninjured for ever._

                                 NOTES.

Copies of this chapter are found on the coffins of Mentuhotep and
Sebak-āa at Berlin, and have been published by Lepsius in his _Aelteste
Texte_, pl. 8, 21, 22, and 34. They are unfortunately in very mutilated
condition, and my translation follows the text of the Theban papyri.

1. The _Re-ḥunit_ in this place is clearly not an Egyptian locality, but
a passage between the Netherworld and heaven or earth.

2. _Solicitations_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _ambire_, _ambitio_, and in a
bad sense _ambages_.

3. This passage explains what is meant in Chapter 28 by the _god of the
Broad Face_. One of the papyri (_Ia_) adds the well known epithet of the
setting sun ⁂⁂ ‘old.’

It is Hathor who proceeds to Heliopolis, as the feminine suffix which is
used in the oldest texts, proves.

4. M. Lefébure (Papyrus de Soutimès, p. 3, note 8) understands the
passage as meaning “_I seek_ the direction of _the wind_ in order to
avoid it.” But I am inclined to recognize a superstition still current
among sailors, the “whistling for a breeze.”

The oldest copies and the more recent ones have different readings, and
though the words _uḫa ḫemu_ occur repeatedly in the Pyramid Texts, the
second word is not written ⁂⁂⁂⁂, as in the Theban papyri,
but ⁂⁂⁂⁂.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER LXIX.

                           _Otherwise said_:


I am a Flaming One, and brother to a Flaming One.

I am Osiris, brother to Isis. He who avengeth me is my son Horus, in
company with his mother, upon mine adversaries; adversaries who have
done to me all wicked and evil things.

Chains have been put upon their arms and hands and feet in consequence
of the evil things which they have done to me.

I am Osiris, the eldest of the great cycle of the gods(1.) and heir of
his father Seb.

I am Osiris, the Lord of the heads of life; powerful before and behind;
his phallus extendeth to the limits of the human race.[81]

I am Sahu, who assigneth the bounds as he saileth round the starry
throng of Heaven, the body of my mother Nut, who conceived me at her
will and brought me forth at her desire.

I am Anubis on the day of the Rending asunder.

I am the Bull in the Field; I, even I, Osiris, who shut up his father
and his mother on the day when the great slaughter took place. My father
is Seb and my mother is Nut.

I am Horus, the eldest of Rā as he riseth.

I am Anubis on the day of Rending asunder: I am Osiris.

O great One, who enterest and speakest to him who presenteth the tablets
and guardeth the door of Osiris,(2.) grant that I may come in and be
glorified, let me be appraised, and let me be made vigorous, that I may
come and avenge myself.

Let me sit at the cradle(3.) of Osiris, and put an end to my suffering
and pain; let me be made strong and vigorous at the cradle of Osiris, so
that I may be born with him and renewed. _Said twice._

Let me seize that Thigh(4.) which is under the place of Osiris, with
which I may open the mouth of the gods and sit by him, like Thoth the
Scribe, sound of heart,(5.) with thousands of loaves, beer, beef, and
fowl upon the table of my father, and the flesh of oxen and birds of
various kinds,(6.) which I offer to Horus, which I present to Thoth, and
which I sacrifice to the Lord of Heaven.

-----

Footnote 81:

  _Cf._ note on the _Ass_ of Chapter 40.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER LXX.

                           _Another Chapter._


I have come to an end(7.) for the Lord of Heaven. I am written down as
sound of heart, and I rest at the table of my father Osiris, King of
Tattu, and my heart is stirred by his country. I breathe the eastern
breeze by its hair(8.); I grasp the north wind by its side lock; I grasp
the south wind by the skin as I make the circuit of heaven on its four
sides; I seize the east wind by the skin, and I give the breezes to the
faithful dead amid those who eat bread.

_If this scripture is known upon earth he will come forth by day, he
will walk upon earth amid the living: his name will be uninjured for
ever._


ce NOTES TO CHAPTERS LXIX AND LXX.

These last two chapters are always found together, and always appended
to the ancient Chapter 68. This is the case not only in the papyri, but
in tombs like that of Bakenrenef.

1. The later texts say “the eldest of the five gods.”

2. _Who presenteth the tablets and guardeth the door of Osiris._ See
picture of Thoth in the Psychostasia.

3. Where Osiris renews his birth.

4. _The Thigh._ The iron instrument so called used in the ceremony of
‘Opening the mouth’ of the deceased.

5. _Sound of heart_ implies that the conscience of the deceased has been
recognized as blameless.

6. _Oxen and birds of various kinds._ These kinds are named in the text,
but we have no corresponding European names.

7. _I have come to an end._ The first two words of this chapter are
evidently copied from the end of the last, but instead of _menḥu_,
‘sacrificial slaughter,’ the notion of _menȧ_ or _meni_ ‘coming to an
end,’ has been substituted. Later texts read “I do _not_ come to an
end.”

8. _Its hair._ All this paragraph sounds very strangely, and translators
are tempted to understand that the _hair_, _side-lock_, and _skin_ of
the deceased are acted upon by the winds.[82] But the feminine suffix
shows that the converse is the case. The speaker catches the air and
distributes it, as we are afterwards told, to the faithful departed.

-----

Footnote 82:

  But we “catch Time by the forelock,” and so did the Greeks.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER LXXI.

             _Chapter whereby one cometh forth by day._(1.)


O Divine Hawk, who comest forth in Heaven, Lord of Mehurit.(2.)

Make thou me sound,(3.) even as thou hast made thyself sound, who
revealest thyself,(4.) who disrobest thyself, and presentest thyself to
the Earth.

May his will towards me be done by the Lord of the Lord of the One
Face(5.).

I am the Hawk in the Tabernacle and I pierce through [that which is
upon] the Vail.(6.)

Here is Horus, the Son of Isis: Horus the Son of Isis.

Make thou me sound, even as thou hast made thyself sound, who revealest
thyself, who disrobest thyself, and presentest thyself to the Earth.

May his will towards me be done by the Lord of the One Face.

I am the Hawk in the Southern Heaven, and Thoth in the Northern Heaven,
who appease the Flame when raging and who convey Law to the god who
loveth it.

Here is Thoth: Thoth.

Make thou me sound, even as thou hast made thyself sound, who revealest
thyself, who disrobest thyself, and presentest thyself to the Earth.

May his will towards me be done by the Lord of the One Face.

I am Unbu of En-areref, the Flower of the Abode of Occultation.

Here is Osiris: Osiris.

Make thou me sound, even as thou hast made thyself sound, who revealest
thyself, who disrobest thyself, and presentest thyself to the Earth.

May his will towards me be done by the Lord of the One Face.

O thou who art upon thy two legs [_or_ who art terrible upon thy two
legs], at thine own hour, owner of the Two Twin Souls, and who livest in
Two Twin Souls.

Make thou me sound, even as thou hast made thyself sound, who revealest
thyself, who disrobest thyself, and presentest thyself to the Earth.

May his will towards me be done by the Lord of the One Face.

O thou who circlest round, within thine Egg, Lord of Mehurit.

Make thou me sound, even as thou hast made thyself sound, who revealest
thyself, who disrobest thyself, and presentest thyself to the Earth.

May his will towards me be done by the Lord of the One Face.

Sebak standeth erect, surrounded by his high places, and Neith standeth
erect in the midst of her alluvial grounds, in order to reveal
themselves, to disrobe themselves and to present themselves to the
Earth.

May his will towards me be done by the Lord of the One Face.

Oh ye Seven Divine Masters,(7.) who are the arms of the Balance on the
Night wherein the Eye is fixed; ye who strike off the heads and cleave
the necks, who seize the hearts and drag forth the whole hearts, and
accomplish the slaughter in the Tank of Flame: ye whom I know and whose
names I know, know you me as I know your names.

I advance to you, advance ye to me: live in me and let me live in you.
Convey to me the Symbol of Life which is in your hands, and the Sceptre
which ye grasp.(8.)

Award to me the life of yearly speech through countless years of life in
addition to my years of life; countless months in addition to the months
of my life; countless days in addition to the days of my life; and
countless nights in addition to the nights of my life, that I may come
forth and beam upon my own images, with breath for my nostrils, and eyes
which see, amid those who are at the Horizon, on that day when brute
Force(9.) is brought to a reckoning.

_If this Chapter is known there is well-being on earth with Rā and a
fair abode with Osiris, and the person is glorified in the Netherworld.
There are granted to him the sacred cakes and the coming forth into the
presence,[83] in the course of each day, undeviatingly, for times
infinite._

                                 NOTES.

1. The title as here translated is taken from the oldest known MS., that
of Nebseni. But the Papyrus _Pc_, which is of the same period, has
“_Chapter for entering after going forth by day, and for making
transformations in all forms_,” and this title or a very similar one is
found on other papyri. The most recent form is that in the Turin
copy--_Chapter for coming forth by day and repelling brute Force, so
that the person may not be seized in the Netherworld, but that his soul
may be made sound in the Ta-t’ eserit._

2. _Lord of Mehurit_ = Lord of Heaven, that is the Sun-god. The
invocation is repeated a little farther on, “O thou who circlest within
thine Egg, Lord of Mehurit.” The god is also said to be the owner of
“the Two Twin Souls,” namely Rā and Osiris.

3. The verb is here in the second person, not in the first. This is
shown by those texts which give the name of the person, instead of the
pronominal suffix, as the object of the verb.

4. _Thyself_ = Here, in all but the later copies, the pronoun of the
third person is used, in accordance with a well known Egyptian idiom.

5. _Lord of the One Face_ = μονοπρόσωπος in opposition to πολυπρόσωπος
which is an epithet of the Sky, on account of its many changes of
aspect. The Moon too has a variety of phases, whereas the Sun is
eminently the “Lord of One Face.” From another point of view the god, at
the beginning of chapter 64, is called the “Lord of Two Faces,” the
bright and the dark. The Pyramid Texts have the parallel conception of
the Two Eyes of Horus, one white and one black, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂
(Unas 37).

6. This passage receives illustration from the great inscription of
Piānchi, who at Heliopolis paid a visit to the great Tabernacle
(⁂⁂⁂) of the Sun-god, the doors of which he opened and
afterwards sealed up with the royal seal. Before going up the steps to
it he had to lift the _Vail_ (⁂⁂⁂⁂) or Curtains which
concealed it, and perform sprinklings and offer incense and flowers. Two
important words (of which the first has the interesting variant ⁂ and
the second is written ⁂⁂⁂ in the oldest texts) are thus made
clear.

The god is said, according to the different readings, to pierce
“through, the Vail” or “through _what is upon_ the Vail.”

It will be remembered that the Hebrew Holy of Holies was separated from
the Sanctuary by a curtain upon which the figures of Cherubim were
woven, that before the curtain of the Holy of Holies stood the altar
upon which incense was offered each morn and evening, and that in
sin-offerings the priest sprinkled blood seven times before the Vail of
the Sanctuary.

7. _The Seven Divine Masters_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂ or
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂,[84] were the offspring of Mehurit, and
assumed the form of Hawks.[85] They were the inventors and patrons of
all the arts and sciences, and they assisted Thoth in composition and in
the measurement of the earth. See references in Brugsch’s article,
_Zeits._, 1872, p. 6.

They are, I believe, to be identified, like the Seven Rishis of the
later Sanskrit literature, with the seven stars of the Great Bear. In
this conception the Polar star is represented by Thoth.

8. _The Symbol of Life and the Sceptre_, the ⁂ and ⁂.

9. _Brute Force_ ⁂⁂⁂, see chapter 57, note 5.

-----

Footnote 83:

  Namely, “of the great god.” This ellipse is very frequent.

Footnote 84:

  In the Prisse Papyrus this word is to be understood of a scholar or
  sage, whose word is of authority.

Footnote 85:

  They have human heads on the Louvre Sarcophagus D. 7.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XIX.

                            BOOK OF THE DEAD

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER LXV.
  =Papyrus du Louve, III, 93.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER LXVIII.
  =Papyrus du Louvre, III, 89.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER LXVIII.
  LEPSIUS, “Todt.,” Plate XXV.
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER LXXI.
  =LEPSIUS, “Todt.,” Plate XXVI=.
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER LXXI.
  =Papyrus of Nebseni, British Museum, 9900.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER LXXII.
  =Papyrus du Louvre, III, 93.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER LXXII.
  =Papyrus, Berlin Museum, II.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER LXXIII.
  =Papyrus of Ani, British Museum.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER LXXIV.
  =Papyrus of Ani, British Museum.=
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XX.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER LXXII.
  LEPSIUS, “Todt.,” Plate XXVII.
]

[Illustration:

  CHAP. LXXIV. CHAP. LXXIII.
  LEPSIUS, “Todt.,” Plate XXVII.
]

[Illustration]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTERS OF THE TRANSFORMATIONS OR CHANGES.
  =Cedar Coffin, in the Gizeh Museum.=

  Published by BRUGSCH-PASHA, “Zeitschr. für Aeg. Spr.,” 1867.]
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER LXXII.

    _Chapter whereby one cometh forth by day and passeth through the
                             Ammchit._(1.)


Hail to you, ye Lords of Rule,(2.) devoid of Wrong, who are living for
ever, and whose secular period is Eternity.(3.) I make my way towards
you. Let me be glorified through my attributes; let me prevail through
my Words of Power, and let me be rated according to my merit.

Deliver me from the Crocodile(4.) of this Land of Rule.

Let me have a mouth wherewith I may speak, and let my oblations be
placed before you; because I know you, and I know your names: and I know
the name of that great god to whose nostrils ye present delicacies:
Tekmu is his name. And whether he maketh his way from the Eastern
Horizon of Heaven, or alighteth at the Western Horizon of Heaven, let
his departure be my departure, and his progress be my progress.

Let me not be stopped at the Meskat; let not the Sebau have mastery over
me; let me not be repulsed at your gates, let not your doors be closed
against me; for I have bread(5.) in Pu and beer in Tepu. And let me join
my two hands together(6) in the divine dwelling which my father Tmu hath
given me, who hath established for me an abode above the earth wherein
is wheat and barley of untold quantity, which the son of my own body
offereth to me there as oblations upon my festivals.

Grant me the funereal gifts, beef, fowl, bindings, incense, oil, and all
things good and pure upon which a deity subsists, regularly and
eternally, in all the forms I please.

Let me come down or go up to Sechit-aarru and arrive in Sechit-hotep.

I am the god in Lion form.

_If this book is learnt upon earth, or executed in writing upon the
coffin, he will come forth by day in all the forms he pleaseth, with
entrance into his house without repulse. And there shall be given to him
bread and beer and flesh-meat upon the table of Osiris. He will come
forth to Sechit-aarru, and there shall be given to him wheat and barley
there, for he will flourish as though he were upon earth, and he will do
all that pleaseth him, like those gods who are there: undeviatingly, for
times infinite._

                                 NOTES.

This chapter is often found not only in papyri but upon coffins, in
accordance with the rubric at the end. The earliest copy is on the
coffin of Queen Mentuhotep. A very fine copy is on the alabaster
sarcophagus of Seti I, and our museums are rich in funereal monuments
inscribed with this ancient text. A very similar text is found at the
end of chapter 99.

1. _Ammehit_ is the name given in chapter 149 to the sixth abode in
Amenta, but here and in other places it is simply one of the names of
the Netherworld. In the inscriptions, for instance, of the tomb of Queen
Tita,[86] “passing through the two folding doors of the Ammehit” is in
parallelism with “going in and out of the divine Netherworld.”

2. _Lords of Rule._ This is the reading in most documents, but there are
others which have an equal claim to authority. The invocation is
sometimes made to the ⁂⁂ “those who are possessed of a _ka_,” that
is the “spirits made perfect,” those who have already passed through the
requisite trials, besides the gods who have never passed through the
stage of mortality, all of whom are possessed of a _ka_.

The invocation, according to another reading, which is that of chapter
99, is addressed to the ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ “those who are beautiful or
perfect of _ka_.” Here the papyri add _lords of rule_, and the
invocation, whatever the reading may be, is always addressed to those
who have in their power the laws which regulate the universe.

3. _Whose secular period is Eternity._ ⁂⁂⁂ _ḥentȧ_ is the
period of 120 years (see _Proc. Soc. Bibl. Arch._, XIV, 264) which was
their αἰών, _aevum_, corresponding in idea, not in actual time, to our
century. The secular period of the gods is eternity.

4. _The Crocodile._ Are we to understand this of the crocodile-headed
monster pictured in the representations of the Psychostasia? These
pictures are not known to us from as early a date as the chapter itself,
but they may have existed. Perhaps, however, this passage may have
suggested them.

5. _Bread._ The Egyptian word ⁂ _ta_, like its homonym ⁂, implies
something _pierced_ or _perforated_. The sacrificial cake חַלָּה in
Leviticus viii, 26 has the same meaning and, like חַלִיל _a pipe_, is
connected with חָלָל, _perforavit_, _confodit_, _aperuit_, _profanavit_.
See _Proc. Soc. Bibl. Arch._, 1893, p. 386.

⁂ _ta_, a door or gate, and some other homonyms evidently come under
the same conception; cf. _porta_ and πείρω.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XXI.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER LXXVII.
  =Papyrus of Ani, British Museum.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER LXXVIII.
  =Papyrus of Ani, British Museum.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER LXXVIII.
  LEPSIUS, “Todt.”
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER LXXVIII.
  =Leiden Papyrus,
  T. 16.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER LXXVIII.
  LEPSIUS, “Todt.”
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER LXXIX.
  =Papyrus du Louvre, III, 89.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER LXXIX.
  =Papyrus of Sutimes, Bibl. Nat.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER LXXXI.
  =Papyrus of Ani, British Museum.=
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XXII.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER LXXXIII.
  =Papyrus of Ani,
  British Museum.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER LXXXIV.
  =Papyrus of Ani,
  British Museum.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER LXXXIA.
  =Papyrus of Nebseni, British Museum, No. 9900.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER LXXXV.
  =Papyrus du Louvre, III, 89.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER LXXXII.
  =Papyrus of Ani, British
  Museum.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER LXXXIII.
  =Papyrus, Berlin Museum,
  No. 2.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER LXXXVI.
  =Papyrus, Leyden
  Museum, II.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER LXXXVI.
  =Papyrus of Ani, British
  Museum.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER LXXXVII.
  =Papyrus, Berlin
  Museum, No. 1.=
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER LXXIII.

                     is identical with Chapter IX.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER LXXIV.

        _Chapter whereby the legs are set in motion upon earth._


Do what thou hast to do, O Sekaru (_twice_); as The god who is in his
own house, and as The god who standeth on his legs in the Netherworld.

I shine above the Leg(1.) as I come forth in Heaven, but I lie helpless
with corpselike face.

Oh I faint, I faint, as I advance; I faint, I faint before the teeth of
those whose mouth raveneth in the Netherworld.

                                 NOTE.


1. _The Leg._ In this place, as in chapter 98 and other texts, a
constellation in the northern sky is meant, which many years ago I
identified with Cassiopeia.

This constellation, according to chapter 98, is in the Northern sky and
in the _Great Stream_ ⁂⁂⁂, by which I understand the “Milky
Way.” This position is also in accordance with the ancient text on the
Coffin of Amamu, pl. XXVI, line 22. The _Leg_ is as close to the Pole as
the Great Bear (called the _Thigh_ in Egyptian Astronomy) but in the
opposite direction, and in consequence of this position it never sets
below the horizon. Hence in the Pyramid Texts (Pepi I, 411 and Merenrā
589) it is called ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. And here,
according to these texts, as in the Book of the Dead (see chapter 86),
purification was obtained.

The god ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ (also named among the 42 judges) whose face
looks backwards, and who is said to be gate keeper of Osiris, must be a
star (_e.g._ γ Cepheus) in the immediate neighbourhood of the Polar Star
which represented Osiris. On the ancient coffins of Amamu and Sit-Bastit
there is a chapter[87] for assuming the form of a Vulture ⁂⁂⁂,
in which the speaker says “I am the Vulture god who is on the
⁂⁂⁂⁂.”

I suspect that in the formula
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ said of Osiris on the
stelæ of the twelfth dynasty, the constellation in heaven and not a
place at Abydos was meant.

-----

Footnote 86:

  Brugsch, _Rec._, II, pl. 63. The whole tomb has now been published by
  M. Bénédite in the _Mémoires de la Mission Archéologique au Caire_,
  tome 5.

Footnote 87:

  It was afterwards incorporated with chapter 149.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER LXXV.

 _Chapter whereby one cometh to Heliopolis and receiveth a seat there._


I have come out of the Tuat: I am come from the ends of the Earth,
lighting up the Tank, whither the desires of them who bring salutation
guide me. I pass through the noble dwellings of those who are coffined.
I open the dwelling of Remrem, I reach the house of Achsesef.(1.) I am
led on to the noble mysteries, and I enter into the house of Kemkem.

[The Tet amulet(2.) layeth its two hands upon me and assigneth me to its
sister, and the custody of its mother, Kehkehit, who setteth me upon the
Eastern path of Heaven upon which Rā ariseth and mounteth on high each
day.

May I too arise, and be led on, and assume the mummied form as a god,
and let them set me upon that noble path] whereon Thoth travelleth when
he appeaseth the two Combatants(3.) as he goeth to Pu and advanceth to
Tepu.

                                 NOTES.

1. These gods are not often mentioned. But we are told in the
inscriptions of Rech-ma-rā (_Mission Arch. du Caire_, V, 127) that
Achsesef is master of the (⁂⁂) great hall of the Prince of those
in Amenta. _Cf._ _Todt._, 142, 13 and 21.

2. _The Tet amulet_, ⁂, has a chapter of its own, chapter 156.
Divinity was supposed to reside in this and the other religious symbols,
which are often represented in pictures with hands and feet. The annexed
Vignette is from the Louvre papyrus III, 93, at ch. 93.

[Illustration]

The part of this chapter which is within brackets is ancient, but is
omitted in late copies.

3. _The two Combatants._ Sut and Horus.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER LXXVI.

      _Chapter whereby all forms are assumed which one pleaseth._


I have made my way into the Royal Palace, and it was the Bird-Fly(1.)
who brought me hither.

Hail to thee, who fliest up to Heaven, to give light to the stars and
protect the White Crown which falleth to me.

Stable art thou, O mighty god, for ever. Make thou for me a path upon
which I may pursue my course.

                                 NOTE.,


1. _The Bird-Fly_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. On this god, see _Proc.
Soc. Bibl. Arch._, 1892, p. 396 and following, and also 1893, p. 135 and
following. In the papyrus of Nebseni the name has for determinative an
insect, which M. Lefébure has identified with the _mantis_. This deity,
according to ancient texts, was the _Tiller of the Rudder_ of the
Neshemit ship of Osiris.

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER LXXVII.

    _Chapter whereby one assumeth the form of the Golden Hawk._(1.)


I set myself to view: I set myself to view as the Golden Hawk, which
cometh out from its Egg; and I fly and I hover as a Hawk of four cubits
across the back. My two wings are of the green gem of the South.(2.)

I come forth from the cabin of the Sektit Bark and I raise myself up
from the Eastern Hill.

I stoop upon the Âtit Bark, that I may come and raise to me those who
are in their circles, and who bow down before me.

I display myself and gather myself together as the beautiful Golden Hawk
with the head of a Heron, to listen to whose utterances Râ cometh every
day, and I sit down in the midst of all the great gods of Heaven.

The fields lie before me; the produce is before me; I eat of it, I wax
radiant upon it, I am saturated with it to the satisfaction of my heart.

Nepra hath given to me my throat, and I am in possession of all that
pertaineth to my person.(3.)

                                 NOTES.

1. This is the first of a series of chapters relative to the
“Transformations,” the subject of which is treated in the Introduction.
It is sufficient here to repeat that the Egyptian ‘Transformations’ have
nothing in common with Metempsychosis, as understood in the Greek or
Indian religions. The change of form in the Egyptian idea depended upon
the will of the person; it was not a penance for sin, but a means of
glorification. And all the forms assumed in the Book of the Dead by the
deceased are well known forms of the Sun-god.

2. _Green gem of the South_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂. This has generally been
understood as representing the green feldspar of which many objects in
our museums are made. But Dümichen (_Zeitschr._, 1872) has shown that
the ⁂⁂ ‘of the _East_’ is a synonym of _Māfkait_, emerald, and M.
Naville has referred to Pliny, who (_Hist. Nat._, XXXVII, 17) speaks of
the Egyptian emeralds ‘qui eruuntur circa Copton oppidum Thebaidis in
collibus, ex cautibus.’ The same author quotes Juba in reference to
Ethiopic gems as being ‘alacriter virides, sed non facile puri aut
concolores.’

3. Nepra is one of the names of Osiris, considered as giver of corn, ὀ
Πυροφόρος. By _Throat_ is here meant the organ or power of swallowing,
deglutition.

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER LXXVIII.

    _Chapter whereby one assumeth the form of the Sacred Hawk._(1.)


Oh Horus! come thou to Tattu, make clear to me the paths, and help me to
make the round of my dwelling places.

Look thou upon me and exalt me, impart to me Terror, and rouse in me
Might, so that the gods of the Tuat may fear me, that their battlements
war in my behalf there; and that _he_ may not assail and slay me in the
house of darkness, who enwrappeth the dead; the god who hideth his name;
or that the like be done by them.

Oh ye gods who give ear to the words; ye foremost ones, ye who are in
the train of Osiris; hush ye up, gods, that which a god speaketh with a
god who is giving ear to a case of Divine Law!

And that which I have said to him say thou, Osiris.

Grant to me that change of existence which hath issued from thy mouth on
my behalf, that I may see thine own attributes and survey thy
Powers.(2.)

Grant that I may come forth and have the mastery of my two feet, and
that I may be there like the Inviolate One on high; that the gods of the
Tuat may fear me and their battlements war on my behalf.

Grant that I may run together with thy Runners, but remain firm upon my
pedestal like the Lord of Life; let me be united with Isis the Mighty;
may they protect me against slaughter, from him who looked upon death.

Let me advance to the goal(3.) of Heaven. I claim words from Seb, and I
pray for sustenance from the Inviolate one on high, so that the gods of
the Tuat may fear me, and that their battlements may war on my behalf,
when they see thy supplies for me.

I am one of those Bright ones in Glory: may my attributes be fashioned
like the attributes of him who cometh forth to Tattu; may I be
invested(4.) with the Soul of him who telleth thee what concerneth me.

Oh impart to me Terror and rouse in me Might that the gods of the Tuat
may fear me and their battlements war on my behalf.

I am the Bright one in Glory, whom Tmu himself hath called into being,
and my origin is from the apple of his eye,(5.) who hath made and
glorified and honoured those who are to be with him. For he is the
Unique in Heaven, whom they extol as he cometh forth from the Horizon,
and the gods and glorified ones who are with him fear him.

I am one of the worms which the eye of the Lord of Oneness hath brought
into being.

Verily, before Isis was, who gave birth to Horus, I grew up and waxed
old, and was honoured beyond those in Glory, who were with me.

And I arose as the Sacred Hawk, whom Horus had invested with his own
Soul for the seisin of his inheritance from Osiris at the Tuat.

And the god in Lion form, who presideth over those who are at the House
of the Nemmes(6.) which is in its caverns, said to me:--

“Go back to the confines of Heaven, for thou art invested with the
attributes of Horus: for thee the Nemmes is not, but free utterance is
thine, even to the confines of Heaven.”

And I took possession of the inheritance of Horus from Osiris at the
Tuat, and Horus repeated to me that which his father Osiris had said to
him in the early time, on the Burial Day of Osiris.

“The Nemmes hath been given to me by the god in Lion form, that thou
mayest advance and go upon the path of Heaven, so that those who are on
the confines of the Horizon may see thee and that the gods of the Tuat
may fear thee, and that their battlements may war on thy behalf.”
[Aahat.(7.)]

At the divine words all they who are at the funereal shrine of the Lord
of Oneness bend low.

Oh thou who art raised above thy coffin and bereft of the Nemmes, the
god in Lion form hath reached the Nemmes to me, and wings are given to
me.

He hath given me strength through his back, through his back, and
through his most powerful might, that I fall not upon Shu.(8.)

I propitiate my fair brother, the Master of the two Uræi.

I, even I, am he who knoweth the paths of Heaven; its breezes are upon
me, the raging Bull stoppeth me not as I advance whithersoever there
lieth a wreck in the Field of Eternity, and I pilot myself towards the
darkness and the suffering of the deceased ones of Osiris.

I come daily through the house of the god in Lion form, and I pass forth
from it to the house of Isis the Mighty, that I may see glorious,
mysterious and hidden matters, even as she hath caused me to see the
divine offspring of the Great One.

I am invested with the soul of Horus, so that I see what is in it, and
when I speak hard by the Doors of Shu they respond to the moment.(9.)

It is I who have charge of the seisin of the inheritance of Horus from
Osiris at the Tuat.

It is I, even I, who am Horus in Glory. I am master of his diadem, I am
master of his Light, and I advance to the Goal of Heaven. Horus is on
his seat, Horus is upon his throne.

My face is that of the Sacred Hawk, my back that of the Sacred Hawk: I
am equipped as his master.

I come forth to Tattu, that I may see Osiris.

I incline myself before him, I incline myself to Nut: they behold me,
and the gods behold me; the Eye of Horus and the Flame which is in the
Two Eyes. They stretch out their arms to me. And I stand erect and
prevail in opposition to evil.

They open to me the bright paths; they open to me the bright paths; they
see my attributes, they listen to my words.

Hail to you, ye gods of the Tuat, ye of repellent face and aggressive
front, who tow along the Stars which set, and make the bright paths of
the Hematit(10.) for the Lord of the Soul Most Mighty: Horus hath
ordained that ye should lift up your faces and look upon me.

And I display myself as the Sacred Hawk whom Horus hath invested with
his soul for taking the possession of his inheritance from Osiris at the
Tuat.

I set aside the long-haired gods and passed on through those who had
charge of their dens in my sight: I made my way and passed on and
reached those who presided over their caverns, and those who had charge
of the House of Osiris; and I speak to them, and make them recognize the
god of Mighty Terrors, who is armed with horns against Sutu. I make them
recognize who it is that hath seized for himself the divine provisions
and hath equipped himself with the powers of Tmu.

A gracious pass grant they to me, the gods of the Tuat, as many as there
are who preside over their caverns and have charge of the House of
Osiris.

Behold me, I am come to you and have carried off and put together my
forms....(11.)

I make bright the paths which are in the Horizon and the Hematit in
Heaven. I make firm the battlements on behalf of Osiris, and I make the
paths bright in his behalf.

I have done according to the command that I should come forth to Tattu
to see Osiris, and tell him of the fortunes of that great Son of his
whom he loveth, and who hath pierced the heart of Sutu. I have seen the
death.

Yea, I tell them the divine plans which Horus carried out in the absence
of his father Osiris.

O Lord of the Soul Most Mighty, behold me; I come, raise thou me up that
I may see the Tuat.

May all the paths which are in Heaven and upon earth be open to me, and
let there be no repulse for me.

Thou art exalted upon thy throne, Osiris; thine hearing is good, Osiris;
thy back is strong, Osiris; thy head, Osiris, is firmly fastened, thy
throat is made fast, thine heart is glad, thou art confident in the
strength and courage of those around thee. Thou art established in
strength as the Bull of Amenta.

Thy son Horus is seated upon thy throne, and all that liveth is subject
to him. Endless generations are at his service, endless generations are
in fear of him; the cycle of the gods is in fear of him, the cycle of
the gods is at his service. So saith Tmu, the Sole Force of the gods;
not to be altered is that which he hath spoken.

Horus is the offering and the altar of offering; twofold of aspect; it
is Horus who hath reconstituted his father and restored him. Horus is
the father, Horus is the mother, Horus is the brother, Horus is the
kinsman. Horus proceedeth from the essence of his father and the
corruption which befell him.

He ruleth over Egypt, and the gods are in his service. He hath carried
off endless generations, and given life to endless generations with his
Eye; the sole one of its Lord, the Inviolate one.

                                 NOTES.

This chapter is seldom found in the complete shape which it has in the
Turin _Todtenbuch_. The shortest copy of it is that in the tomb of
Horhotep (_Miss. Arch. Fr._, p. 158); it has but a few lines; but they
are very important, as giving the earliest form of the formula
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, which is an invocation to
the battlements. The common reading, which adds the pronominal suffix
⁂ both to the verb and to its subject, is ungrammatical. The papyri
_Au_, _Pg_, and _Ij_, rightly omit the suffix after the verb, in the
early part of the chapter.

The coffin of Amamu has a chapter of the same title, but with quite a
different text.

1. _Sacred Hawk._ Between this and the _Golden Hawk_ of the last chapter
the vignettes make no distinction but that of colour, which is
indicative of age rather than of kind. The typical Egyptian Hawk may be
identified with the Falco Lanarius, or with the Peregrinus, but
naturalists tell us that “the Lanier of Buffon is the perfect state of
the male Peregrinus,” and that “the Lanner of Pennant is a young female
Peregrine.”

2. _Thy powers_, ⁂ _baiu_.

3. _The goal_ ⁂⁂⁂ or ⁂⁂⁂, a word we have already met
in chapter 72 (_see_ Note 3), and which occurs later on in the present
chapter. It is apparently connected with the verb of motion,
⁂⁂⁂, and seems here to correspond to the Greek βαλβῖδες, or the
Latin _carceres_, the two posts which were at once the starting point
and the goal.

                                     “signum unde reverti.
           Scirent, et longos ubi circumflectere cursus.”[88]

4. _Invested_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂, which is connected with ⁂⁂⁂.
The determinative ⁂ is the symbol of investiture, which is also
expressed by the sign ⁂. A mummied person is called _Sāhu_, in virtue
of his investiture.

5. _Apple of the eye_, literally _point_, _thorn_; ⁂⁂⁂⁂.

6. The _Nemmes_ ⁂⁂ is the royal head-dress in the form of a wig.
This chapter is the only one in the Book of the Dead in which it is
referred to, but other religious texts mention it. It is one of the
objects provided for the deceased in the pictures of ancient coffins.
(See _Aelteste Texte_, p. 35.)

7. [Aahat.] In this place different MSS. introduce one or more words
followed by the sign ⁂, determinative of divinity. But the whole text
which follows is extremely unsatisfactory. The prudent scribe who copied
_Pg_ has the words “I am the great god,” and with them ends the chapter.

8. _Fall upon Shu_, or _before_ Shu, who represents Daylight.

9. The passage is obscure through the absence of the right determinative
⁂ after ⁂⁂. The portals of Shu, the gates of Morning, answer
the summons of the god who comes as Horus. ⁂ has the sense of _obviam
ire_, _occurrere_.

10. _Hematit_ ⁂⁂⁂, a place near the Horizon, not mentioned in
the Book of the Dead except in this chapter. It has disappeared in the
later recensions.

11. Here follow one or two divine names unknown to the copyists, and by
them written at random.

-----

Footnote 88:

  _Aeneid_, V, 130.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER LXXIX.

 _Chapter whereby one assumeth the form of the Chief god of the Divine
                                Cycle._


Hail to thee, Tmu, Lord of Heaven, who givest motion to all things which
come into being; thou who comest forth from the Earth and createst
whatsoever is begotten: Lord of the things which are; who givest birth
to the gods; great god, self-produced; Lord of Life, who givest vigour
to the men now living:

Hail to you, ye Lords of pure things, ye whose abodes are hidden:

Hail to you, ye Lords of Eternity, ye whose attributes are concealed,
and the place where ye reside is unknown.

Hail to you, ye gods who are in the divine circuit and the Kabhu; ye
gods who are in Amenta and ye, O Divine Cycle which is in Heaven:

Let me come to you, let me be purified and strengthened, let me be
enriched and gifted with power, let me have possession and glory.

I bring in offering to you perfume, incense and natron. Stop ye the
outpourings of your hearts against me. I am come to put a stop to all
the wrong things which are in your hearts, and to do away with the false
charges which have been made to you.

But I bring in offering to you well-being.[89] I lift up in offering to
you Maāt.

I know you and I know your names, and I know your attributes, though it
be not known what by you may be brought to pass.

I come before you and make my appearance as that god in the form of a
man who liveth like a god, and I stand out before you in the form of
that god who is raised high upon his pedestal, to whom the gods come
with acclamation, and the female deities with jubilation, when they see
him.

I come before you and make my appearance on the seat of Rā, and I sit
upon my seat which is on the Horizon, and receive the offerings upon
their altars. I drink the sacred liquor each evening, in the form of the
Lord of all creatures, and I am exalted like that venerable god the Lord
of the Great House, whom the gods rejoice at seeing at his beautiful
comings forth from the womb of Nut, to whom Nut each day giveth birth.

-----

Footnote 89:

  Perhaps rather _glory_, _splendour_,⁂⁂⁂⁂, which
  implies something to be _seen_.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER LXXX.

 _Chapter whereby one assumeth the form of the god who giveth Light to
                             the Darkness._


It is I who complete the vesture of Nu, the Light which shineth before
him, lighting up the darkness. I unite with the two brother-gods who are
upon me through the mighty Words of Power of my mouth. I raise up the
fallen one who cometh after me. I fall along with him in the vale of
Abydos when I go to rest.

I have seized upon Hu from the place in which I found him. And I have
lifted off the darkness through my power. I have rescued the Eye from
its eclipse against the coming of the Fifteenth day, and balanced Sutu
in the mansions above, against the Great one who is with him.

I have equipped Thoth [with light] in the house of the Moon.

I seize upon the Crown. Maāt is upon me, and the Emerald and the Crystal
of her months.

This field of mine is of Azure in the festival thereof.

I lighten up the darkness and overthrow the devouring monsters.(1.)

Those who are in their own darkness worship me, and they rise up to me,
covering their faces, who mourn and are prostrate: look ye therefore
upon me.

I am the Craftsman(2.) of Nu, but I come not up in order that you should
hear of this.

I am the Craftsman of Nu, who lighteneth the darkness, and I have come
to dissipate the darkness, and that light should be.

                                 NOTES.

1. _Devouring monsters_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

2. The later recensions have ⁂ or ⁂⁂⁂ _wife_. The older
papyri omit the feminine ending, which is inconsistent with the rest of
the chapter. I understand ⁂ or ⁂⁂, in the sense of artist,
craftsman.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER LXXXI.

         _Chapter whereby one assumeth the form of the Lotus._


I am the pure Lotus which cometh forth from the glory which is at the
nostril of Rā, and I make my journey and pursue it for Horus, the great
god beloved.

I am the pure Lotus which cometh forth in the field.

                                 NOTE.

This little chapter is not without its special difficulty. Are we to
read ⁂⁂⁂ as a word implying motion, with ⁂ as its
determinative, or as implying invocation, with ⁂ as its
determinative? The copyists differed and some of them changed the word
into ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ so that there should be no ambiguity. But this
does not clear up the words which immediately follow; hence _Ba_ has
suppressed them, whilst other copyists have given themselves no trouble
as to the sense of what they wrote.

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER LXXXII.

 _Chapter whereby one assumeth the form of Ptah, eateth bread, drinketh
           beer, and sitteth in the midst of the great gods._


I fly like the Hawk, I cackle like the Smen-goose, I alight on the right
side of the Aat, on the feast of the Great One.

I execrate, I execrate: I eat it not. Dirt is what I execrate: I eat it
not. That which my Genius execrateth let it not enter into me.

Let me therefore live upon that which is put before them; the gods and
the glorified ones. Let me live and enjoy the bread and....[90] Let me
then eat them in the presence of the gods and glorified ones. Let me
enjoy and eat them under the foliage of the date trees of Hathor, my
sovereign. Let the oblations be made, of bread and beer in Tattu, and
bendings of the head in Annu. Let my vesture be girt upon me by Tait.
Let me sit wherever it pleaseth me.

My head is that of Rā and I am summed up as Tmu: Four times the arm’s
length of Rā: four times the width of the world.(1.)

I have come forth with the tongue of Ptah and the throat of Hathor that
I may record the words of my father Tmu with my mouth, which draweth to
itself the Spouse of Seb, and the proclamation of whose lips inspireth
fear.

I repeat the acclamations at my success on being declared the heir of
the Lord of Earth, Seb, from whom I issue.

Seb purifieth me, and giveth me his Theophanies.(2.) The dwellers in
Annu bow their heads to me. I am their Master. I am their Bull. More
powerful am I than the Lord of Time; I am the author and the master of
endless years.

                                 NOTES.

1. Not in length but in periphery. The ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ implies a
quadrangular figure, and so do ⁂⁂. Of this quadrangle, North,
South, East, and West, are not cardinal points or angles, but _sides_.

2. _Theophanies_, ⁂⁂⁂. This is the true meaning of the word,
whether in reference to the Sun rising in the sky or to the king upon
his throne.

-----

Footnote 90:

  The word seems to have been unintelligible to the copyists, who differ
  widely from each other as to its orthography.

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER LXXXIII.

       _Chapter whereby one assumeth the form of the Bennu bird._


Let me wheel round in whirls, let me turn like the Turning One, let me
flourish like a flower and keep myself hidden like the Hider.(1.)

I am the Barley corn of every god.

I am the four Yesterdays of those seven Uræus deities who are born in
Amenta; Horus who giveth light by means of his own body; the god who is
against Sutu when Thoth is between them, as in that dispute of the
Prince of Sechem with the Spirits of Annu where the river is between
them.(2.)

I come forth by day and disclose myself at the head of the gods.

I am the god who chaseth all boastfulness.(3.)

                                 NOTES.

1. There is here a play on the words _pa_, _ḫeper_, _ruṭ_ and _šet_. The
_Turning One_ is the god Chepera. The _Tortoise_ ⁂⁂⁂ derives
its name (the _hider_), from the habit of drawing its body within its
shell. On the flight of the Bennu see the first note of next chapter.

2. The Nile lies between the opposite shores of the Nomes of Letopolis
(Sechem) and Heliopolis (Annu).

3. The later recensions have “I am Chonsu who _putteth a stop_ to all
boastfulness.” But in the early copies _Chonsu_ is taken in its
primitive sense _the chaser_ and does not require the verb ⁂ to
govern ‘boastfulness.’

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER LXXXIV.

      _Chapter whereby one assumeth the form of the Hernshaw._(1.)


Thou who holdest the bound victims; ye knives over their heads and locks
and fleeces;(2.) ye aged and bright ones who are armed with the fated
moment.

I come to heaven but I strike upon the earth; and conversely.

It is my power which produceth victory and raiseth the height of heaven,
and I make the lustrations which yield the extent of earth to my feet
against the sinful cities as I advance and cut in pieces(3.) those who
are involved in rebellion.(4.)

I leave the gods upon their paths but I strike the Wakers who are in
their coffins.

I know not Nu, I know not Tatunen, I know not the Red ones when they
bring opposition to me.

I know not a Word of Power to whose utterance I listen.

I am the Red Calf upon the tablets.

This is what the gods say when they raise their voice.

Let your countenances be without restraint towards him who cometh to me.

The morning dawns are independent of you, ye have not the charge of
them; but my alternations are in my own hands. I say not the wrong
instead of the right.

Day after day unswervingly turneth back upon my eye-brow.

And Evening is the beginning of my voyage to celebrate the solemnity of
the Reclining and the Embrace of the Aged one who hath charge of the
Earth.

                                 NOTES.

1. Both the _Bennu_ and the _Shenshen_ (which I here translate
‘Hernshaw’) are Herons. They fly to a great height in spiral whirls.

2. The true reading here seems to be ⁂⁂ from ⁂⁂ ‘shear.’

3. _Cut in pieces._ The papyrus of Ani gives the valuable reading ⁂.

4. _Rebellion._ So I understand ⁂⁂, a wrongful and violent
_rising_, ἐπανάστασις.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER LXXXV.

 _Chapter whereby one assumeth the form of a Soul,_(1.) _that one may not
         come to the dungeon. Imperishable is he who knoweth it._


I am a Soul. I am Rā who proceedeth from Nu, and my soul is divine. I am
he who produceth food, but I execrate what is wrong and look not upon
it.

I am possessor of Maāt and subsist by means of it.

I am the Food which perisheth not; in my name of the Self-originating
Force, together with Nu, in the name of Chepera, from whom I am born
daily.

I am the Lord of Daylight and I execrate Death, let me not enter into
the dungeons of the gods of the Tuat.

It is I who give glory to Osiris and propitiate the hearts of those who
are with him, my own friends.

They inspire the fear of me, and put forward my might to those within
their domains.

And behold me, how I am raised upon my pedestal and upon my throne.

I am Nu. They shall not overthrow me who do wrong.

I am he whose orbits are of old; my soul is divine, it is the Eternal
Force.

It is I who create the Darkness which maketh its seat at the confines of
Heaven.

My Soul hath come, far advanced in age, and I create the Darkness at the
confines of Heaven at my pleasure.

I reach the limits, and I advance upon my feet.

I take the lead and I traverse the steel firmament which maketh a
curtain.(2.) I put a stop to the Darkness and the worms; I whose name is
hidden.

I drive away aggression from before the Lord of the two hands, who is my
own Soul. The Uræus divinities are my body. My image is Eternal, the
Lord of years, the King of Everlasting.

I am exalted as Lord of the land of Rebu: ‘the Youth in Town, the Lad in
the Country’ is my name; and my name is imperishable.

I am the Force which createth Heaven and maketh its abode in the
Netherworld.

Not to be seen is my nest; not to be broken is my Egg.

I am the Lord on High. I have made my nest on the confines of Heaven,
and I descend to the earth of Seb and put a stop to evil. I see my
father, the Lord of the Gloaming, and I breathe.(3.)

                                 NOTES.

1. Soul. The Egyptian word which in our modern languages we translate as
_Soul_ has already been explained as meaning _Force_. It is so
translated in this chapter in several passages where this sense is
emphatically required.

2. _A curtain_, ⁂ _šet_, literally a _skin_. _Cf._ Ps. civ, 2, “Who
stretchest out the heavens like a curtain,” where the LXX render
‘curtain’ by δέῤῥιν and the Vulgate by _pellem_.

3. Here the chapter ends in _Pc_. The few words which follow in other
MSS. were unintelligible to the copyists and are written very variously.

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER LXXXVI.

      _Chapter whereby one assumeth the form of the Swallow._(1.)


I am the Swallow; I am the Swallow.

I am the Scorpion-bird, daughter of Rā.

O ye gods, whose perfume is delicious: Flame which proceedest from the
Horizon: O thou who art in the place whence I have brought the keeper of
his fold--let me have thine arm that I may make my observation at the
Tank of Flame, that I may advance as an envoy and come with the report
of it.

Be it opened to me, in order that I may tell what I have seen.

Horus is in command of his bark. There hath been given to him the throne
of his father, and Sutu that son of Nut is under the grappling hooks
which he made for him.

I have ascertained what is in Sechem. I have touched with my two hands
the Heart of Osiris.(2.)

And that which I went in order to ascertain I am come to tell. Come let
me enter and report my mission.

And I, entering and ascertaining who cometh forth through that gate of
the Inviolate one, I purify myself at that great stream where my ills
are made to cease, and that which is wrong in me is pardoned and the
spots which were on my body upon earth are effaced.

O Keeper of the Portal, let the path be made for me, for I am as one of
you. Let me come forth by day, and walk upon my own legs. Let me have
the feet of the Glorified.

I know the mysterious paths and the gates of Aarru from whence I come.
Here am I, and I come that I may overthrow mine adversaries upon earth,
though my dead body be buried.

_If this chapter be known he will re-enter after coming forth by day._

                                 NOTES.

1. The Swallow ⁂⁂. The objection to this meaning is that the bird
in question was eaten; and that doves or pigeons would be less meagre
food than the Swallow, and therefore more probably intended in the
Egyptian texts. But Swallows are still eaten at Rome, where like Clive
Newcome we may be regaled not only with “wild swans and ducks” but with
“robins, owls, and οἰωνοῖσι τε πᾶσι for dinner.” And Willughby, the
naturalist, found a large quantity of swallows being sold for food at
Valencia in Spain.

The flat head, the short legs, and the tail of the bird are
characteristic not of the pigeon but of the swallow, and on many
pictures (_e.g._, pl. xxi, vignette from Leyden papyrus) we are reminded
of the song--

                         Ἦλθ’ ἦλθε χελιδὼν ...
                         ἐπὶ γαστέρα λευκὰ
                         ἐπὶ νῶτα μέλαινα.

It is not quite plain why the name of Scorpion should be given to the
bird, but the name ⁂⁂⁂ of the insect in itself implies
nothing more than the characteristic _whiteness_ of colour.

2. _Touched with my two hands the Heart of Osiris._

⁂⁂⁂ is the origin of the Coptic ϭⲟϩ ‘touch.’ The word Heart
has dropped out of the later texts (_e.g._, the Turin copy), but in the
older papyri it is found in the form of ⁂⁂ or ⁂.

                            ADDITIONAL NOTE.

In Chapter 86 ⁂⁂⁂ has unquestionably the sense of
_ascertaining by inspection._ The Abbot Papyrus in its account of the
enquiry respecting the spoliation of the royal coffins gives ample
evidence of this meaning. And the word there used for _reporting_ the
result of the inspection is, as is Ch. 86, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _semȧu_,
in Coptic ⲧⲁⲙⲉ.

But it is well to remember that ⁂⁂⁂ has another use; which
perhaps implies the existence of two homonymous roots. In a passage
quoted in Note 21 to Ch. 64, it certainly signifies _restore_. And this
may possibly be its meaning in the rubric of Ch. 64. The journey of
Prince Hortâtâf may have had reference to the _restoration_, not simply
_inspection_, of the temples. In this sense it is often written
⁂⁂⁂⁂ or ⁂⁂⁂⁂ _sȧpu_. The Coptic word for
ἀποκαθιστάναι in Hosea xi, 11 and Acts i, 6 is ⲧⲫⲟ.

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER LXXXVII.

           _Chapter whereby one assumeth the form of Se-ta._


I am Seta--full of years.

I lay myself down [in death], and I am born daily.

I am Seta at the confines of the earth. I lay myself down [in death], I
restore myself and I renew myself daily.

                                 NOTE.

_Se-ta_ ⁂⁂, literally _Filius terrae_, is a common noun
signifying an earth-worm. It is applied to the Sun as rising out of the
earth. There are several pictures at Denderah representing the Sun-god
Hor-sam-ta in the form of the worm rising out of the Lotus of Dawn.
_See_ pl. xxiii, from Mariette, _Dend_. I, 47 and 48.

                  ------------------------------------




                           CHAPTER LXXXVIII.

 _Chapter whereby one assumeth the form of the Crocodile god [Sebak(1.)._


For I am the Crocodile god in all his terrors.

I am the Crocodile god in the form of man.(2.) I am he who carrieth off
with violence. I am the almighty Fish in Kamurit.

I am the Lord to whom one bendeth down(3.) in Sechem.

                                 NOTES.

1. Sebak is not always named in the papyri. The ideogram of the
crocodile was in some copies read _emsuḥ_ and in others _sebak_.

2. _In the form of man_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂. Of the very different
readings this is the most intelligible.

3. _To whom one bendeth down_, literally ‘master of bendings.’

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER LXXXIX.

         _Chapter whereby the Soul is united to the dead Body._


Oh thou who Bringest; Oh thou Runner, who dwellest in thy Keep,(1.) thou
great god; grant that my Soul may come to me from whatsoever place
wherein it abideth.

But if there be a delay in the bringing of my soul to me, thou shalt
find the Eye of Horus standing firm against thee, like those undrowsy
Watchers who lie in Annu, the land wherein are thousands of reunions.

Let my Soul be caught, and the Chu which is with it, wheresoever it
abideth.

Track out(2.) among the things in heaven and upon earth that soul of
mine, wherever it abideth.

But if there be a delay in thy causing me to see my Soul and my Shade,
thou shalt find the Eye of Horus standing firm against thee.

                         ---------------------

Oh ye gods who draw along the Bark of the Eternal one: ye who lift up
above the Tuat, and who raise up the Sky: ye who enable the Souls to
enter into the mummied forms; ye whose hands grasp the cordage, hold
firm with your ropes and stop the adversaries that the Bark may rejoice
and the god proceed in peace.

And now grant that my Soul may come forth in your train from the Eastern
horizon of Heaven for ever and ever.

                                 NOTES.

The oldest papyri present a much shorter form than the later ones. That
portion which is here separated by a line from what goes before it first
appears on the sarcophagus of Seti I and in the papyrus of Ani. The
vignette is a very favourite decoration of mummies.

1. _Keep_ ⁂⁂ of which the regular variant in this chapter is not
_saḥ_ but ⁂⁂ _seḫen_.

2. _Track out_, ⁂⁂⁂ is _investigare_, ἐξιχινεύειν, to follow
the traces like a dog. _See_ _ Denk._ II, 3, where the word occurs in
the title of “master of the trackers,” determined by a man holding a
hound in leash. It is from this notion that the sense of _sight_ or
_looking_ appears in ⁂⁂⁂⁂, ⲛⲁⲩ.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER XC.

         _Chapter whereby Memory is restored(1.) to a person._


Oh thou who choppest off heads and cuttest throats, but restorest memory
in the mouth of the dead through the Words of Power which they possess:
thou seest me not with thine eyes, thou perceivest not with thy
feet;(2.) thou turnest back thy face, thou seest not the executioners of
Shu, who are coming behind thee to chop off thine own head and to cut
thy throat. Let not my mouth be closed, through the Words of Power which
I possess; even as thou hast done to the dead, through the Words of
Power which they possess.

Away with the two sentences uttered by Isis when thou camest to fling
remembrance at the mouth of Osiris(3.) and the heart of Sutu, his enemy,
saying:--

                                 NOTES.

Of this chapter we have unfortunately but one copy in _Fa_, of the Musée
Borély. This is defective both at the beginning and at the end, and the
text is inaccurate. The later copies are so inaccurate that it is
impossible to reconstitute the text. It is precisely on those points
where grammatical accuracy is required for fixing a definite sense that
the manuscripts are hopelessly defective. The preceding translation is
_verbally_ correct, I trust, but I do not pretend that it is
intelligible. It stops where the papyrus _Fa_ stops.

1. _Restored._ The reduplication in ⁂ here gives the verb this
sense.

2. It is not only in Egyptian that verbs of sight are applied to other
perceptions. Aeschylus says κτύπον δέδορκα in _Sept. c. Th._ 104, and
the Hebrew writers furnish similar examples.

3. _At the mouth of Osiris and the heart of Sutu._ To justify this
translation the same preposition ought to govern _mouth_ and _heart_.
But I do not know any copy in which this occurs. The Turin reading is
simply absurd.




                              CHAPTER XCI.

     _Chapter whereby the Soul is secured from imprisonment in the
                             Netherworld._


Oh thou who art exalted and worshipped, all powerful, almighty one, who
grantest thy terrors to the gods, who displayest thyself upon thy throne
of grandeur,(1.) let the way be made for my Soul, my Chu and my Shade.
Let me be thoroughly equipped.

I am a powerful Soul; let the way be made for me to the place where Rā
is and Hathor.

_If this Chapter is known, he taketh the form of a fully equipped Chu in
the Netherworld, and does not suffer imprisonment at any door in the
Amenta, either in coming in or going out._

                                 NOTE.

1. There is no safe text here, ‘grandeur’ is only meant to indicate the
existence of ⁂ in the original. But there certainly ought to be
something different from what any of the MSS. supply.

                  ------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XXIII.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER LXXXVIII.
  =Papyrus, Leyden,
  No. II.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER LXXXVIII.
  =Papyrus of Nebseni, British
  Museum, No. 9900.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER LXXXVII.
  MARIETTE, “DENDERAH.”
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER LXXXVII.   CHAPTER LXXXVIII.
  =Papyrus of Ani, British Museum.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER LXXXIX.
  =Papyrus of Ani, British Museum.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XC.
  =Papyrus, Musée Borély, Marseilles.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XC.
  =LEPSIUS, TODTENBUCH.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XCII.
  =Papyrus du Louvre, III, 89.=
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XXIV.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XCII.
  =Papyrus, British Museum, 9949.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XCII.
  =Papyrus, Boulaq, 21.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XCII.
  =Papyrus of Ani, British Museum.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XCIII.
  =Papyrus, Louvre III, 93.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XCIV.
  =Papyrus, Louvre III, 9.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XCV.
  =Papyrus, British Museum, 10,009.=
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER XCII.

_Chapter whereby the Tomb is opened to the Soul and to the Shade of the
  person, that he may come forth by day and may have mastery of his
  feet._


That standeth open which thou openest, and that is closed which thou
closest, oh thou who art at rest;(1.) thou openest and thou closest to
my Soul, at the bidding of the Eye of Horus: who delivereth me, who
establisheth the glory upon the brow of Rā: [the god] of stretched out
steps and rapid paces, who maketh for me a wide path and vigorous limbs.

I am Horus, the avenger of his father, who lifteth up his father and who
lifteth up his mother with his staff.

Let the path be opened to him who hath mastery of his feet, that he may
look upon the great god within the Bark of Rā on the day of the Soul’s
Reckoning; and my Soul is then at the front during the Reckoning of the
Years.

May the Eye of Horus deliver for me my Soul, and establish my splendour
upon the brow of Rā, and may my radiance be upon your faces who are
attached to the person of Osiris: imprison not my Soul, put not in
custody my Shade.

Let the path be open to my Soul and to my Shade that it may see the
great god within his sanctuary, on the day of the Soul’s Reckoning, and
may repeat the words of Osiris whose place is unseen, and of those who
are attached to the person of Osiris and have the custody of Souls and
Spirits, and who shut up the Shades of the Dead who would do an injury
to me.(2.)

Let the path be thrown open(3.) to thy Genius[91] and to thy Soul,
Glorified one, who art provided with those who conduct thee; sit thou at
the head of the Great ones in thy place; thou shalt not be imprisoned by
those who are attached to the person of Osiris and who have the custody
of Souls and Spirits and who shut up the Shades of the Dead. It is
Heaven that shall hold thee.

                                 NOTES.

1. I cannot agree with those who have hitherto translated this chapter.
The only grammatical interpretation which seems possible for the first
sentence depends upon the sense given to the suffix ⁂⁂ _tȧ_. I
take this as representing the second person singular. ⁂⁂, the
person _at rest_ (Osiris) is the one invoked, and is here translated by
the vocative.

2. The words which follow are evidently the words of Osiris and those
attached to him, which are addressed to the deceased and are repeated by
him. The text here, as indeed everywhere, is very corrupt.

3. _Thrown open_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂. I have explained the sense of the
verb ⁂ _mes_ (_Proc. Soc. Bibl. Arch._, 1882, p. 70) as _stretching
out_, of which notion ⁂ is the determinative. ⁂⁂⁂ is =
⁂⁂ × ⁂. _Mesi uat_ is ‘pandatur via.’

-----

Footnote 91:

  The Egyptian _ka_.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER XCIII.

    _Chapter whereby one avoideth being conveyed to the East in the
                             Netherworld._


Oh thou Phallus of Rā, who fliest from the storm, disablement ariseth
from Baba who useth against me might beyond the mighty and power beyond
the powerful.

If I am conveyed away, if I am carried off to the East; if all evil and
injurious things of a feast day of fiends are perpetrated upon me
through the waving of the Two Horns, then shall be devoured the Phallus
of Rā and the Head of Osiris.

And should I be led to the fields wherein the gods destroy him who
answereth them, then shall the horns of Chepera be twisted back, then
shall blindness(1.) arise in the eyes of Tmu and destruction,(2.)
through the seizure of me, and through my being carried off to the East,
through there being made over me a feast day of the fiends, through all
the murderous work perpetrated upon me.(3.)

                                 NOTES.

This chapter contains one of those threats (of which there are other
instances) made to the gods. The speaker is in fact so identified with
divinity that any evil which happens to him must be conceived as
involving the same calamity to the gods and to the universe.

There is a very considerable difference between the earlier and the
later texts. There is very great confusion in the text of the Turin
_Todtenbuch_ as compared with that of the Cadet papyrus.

1. _Blindness_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂ in the earlier and ⁂⁂ in the
later texts. The latter form, which has for determinative pearls or
globules of some kind, reminds one of the disease formerly called _gutta
serena_.

2. _Destruction_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. But this word is written in
different ways in the papyri. With ⁂ as a suffix it would mean ‘my
destroyer.’ _Ca_ gives ⁂ as a determinative, and thus creates a god
_Hetmu_, or at least a name punning upon that of Tmu, to which it is
united.

3. The more recent texts, like those of the Turin _Todtenbuch_, insert a
negative particle before the mention of each disaster. They pray that
the Phallus of Rā may _not_ be devoured, that the blindness may _not_
come upon Tmu, and so on.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER XCIV.

      _Chapter whereby one prayeth for a Palette and an Inkstand._


Oh mighty one, who seest thy father, and who hast charge of the Book of
Thoth.

Here am I, I come and am glorified and filled with Soul and Power and
provided with the writings of Thoth, which I bring in order to purify
the tunnel which is in Sutu.(1.) I bring the Palette and I bring the
Inkstand as the instruments of Thoth, the secrets of which are divine.

Here am I, as the Scribe; I bring the remains of Osiris;(2.) and the
writing which I have made upon them is decreed by the great god to be
good, daily, among the good. Thou hast decreed, Horus of the Two
Horizons, that I shall be the author of Maāt and tend(3.) it daily to
Rā.

                                 NOTES.

1. _In Sutu_; that is, in Darkness. _See_ chapter 96.

2. The _remains_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂. This word, though commonly applied
to corruption and impurity of dead matter, is taken in an inoffensive
sense when applied to the gods. Compare, _e.g._, _Pepi I_, line 477 and
following.

3. _Tend_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂ _mesi_ (not _sebi_) stretch out, _pandere_,
_protendere_.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER XCV.

      _Chapter whereby is opened the place wherein Thoth resteth._


I am the Dread one(1.) in Storm, who guard the Great one(2.) against
assault.

I smite like the Flint-god: I sprinkle like the Sprinkling-god.(3.)

I am the protection(4.) of the Great one against assault and I give
vigour to the sword which is in the hand of Thoth(5.) in the storm.

                                 NOTES.

The papyrus _Ad_ gives this chapter the title of “assuming the form of
the Smen-goose,” and Dr. Birch published the text of this papyrus in the
_Zeitschrift_ of 1869 (p. 25) as one of those additional chapters which
“do not occur in the Ritual of Turin.” This is of course an error of
oversight. This chapter is in the Turin _Todtenbuch_, and the papyrus
_Ad_ merely gives it under an erroneous title, which was evidently meant
for another text.

1. _The Dread one_, ⁂⁂⁂. Instead of this _Ad_ has
⁂⁂⁂, which I cannot regard otherwise than as a simple blunder
of the scribe. ⁂ is a well known anaglyph in certain scenes, but
there is no evidence of its being a variant of the name of Chnemu.

2. Two of the ancient papyri _Ca_ and _Ad_ read _Horus_, the others have
the _Great goddess_, and so has _Ad_ in the next line. The more recent
texts have (not _urit_, ‘the great one,’ but) _urerit_, ‘the crown.’

3. _The Sprinkling god_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _Aashu_. This god is
mentioned but once in the Book of the Dead, and his name is here
interpreted conjecturally in consequence of the function assigned to him
and of the not unlike word ⁂⁂ _ȧš_ ‘spit.’

4. _Protection._ I read ⁂ instead of ⁂ in the early papyri.

5. _Thoth._ The recent texts have _Chepera_, an evident error. The
allusion is to the storm or distress from which Thoth rescues the Eye of
Horus.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER XCVI.

     _Chapter whereby is opened [the place] where Thoth [resteth]._


I am he who dwelleth in the middle of his own Eye. I have come that I
may deliver Maāt to Rā, and may propitiate Sutu with the libations for
Akar and the red victims of the Faithful of Seb.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER XCVII.


_Said at the Bark_: Staff of Anubis, may I propitiate those four
Glorified ones who follow after the Master of [all] things.

I am the Master of the champaign at their behest, and I am the Father of
the inundation, when he who hath charge of the canals is athirst.

Look therefore upon me, oh ye great and mighty gods, who are foremost
among the Spirits of Annu; let me be exalted in your presence. I am a
well-doer towards you. Lo I come, that I may purify this Soul of mine in
the most high degree; let not that impediment proceeding from your mouth
be issued against me which giveth one over to ruin: let me be purified
in the lake of propitiation and of equipoise: let me plunge into the
divine pool beneath the two divine sycomores of Heaven and Earth.

Now let my Fold be fitted for me as one victorious against all
adversaries who would not that right should be done to me.

I am the Only one; just and true upon the Earth. It is I who say it.

                       *     *     *     *     *

                                 NOTES.

Chapters 96 and 97 are really but one chapter, which M. Naville has
found in only two MSS. of the early period. The end of what Lepsius
calls chapter 97 is hopelessly corrupt. On comparing the three copies
given by M. Naville (two of them being from the papyrus of Nebseni) it
will be seen how impossible it is to restore a grammatical text out of
such discordant materials. The difficulty is not removed by having
recourse to the papyri of a later period.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XXV.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XCVII.
  =Papyrus, British Museum, No. 9,900.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CIII.
  =Papyrus,
  British Museum,
  No. 9,900.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XCVIII.
  =LEPSIUS, Todtenbuch.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CIV.
  =Papyrus, British Museum, No. 9,900.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XCIX.
  =Papyrus, British Museum, No. 9,900.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CV.
  =Papyrus of Sutimes,
  Bibl. Nat.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CV.
  =Papyrus, British Museum, No. 9,900.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CVIII.
  =Papyrus,
  British Museum, No. 9,900.=
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XXVI

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration: CHAPTER XCIX. =Papyrus Busca.=]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XCIX.
  =Papyrus, Berlin Museum, No. 2.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XCIX.
  =Papyrus, Brit. Mus., No. 9905.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XCIX.
  =Papyrus, Musée du Louvre, No. III, 89.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER XCIX.
  =Papyrus Brocklehurst, II.=
]

[Illustration: CHAPTER XCIX. =Papyrus, British Museum, No. 9900.=]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER XCVIII.

        _Chapter whereby one saileth a ship in the Netherworld._


Oh thou Leg in the Northern Sky,(1.) and in that most conspicuous but
inaccessible Stream; I rise up and come to light as a god, I am
conspicuous but inaccessible.

I rise up and live, and bring myself to light as a god.

I cackle even as the Smen-goose, but I stoop(2.) like the Hawk at the
nets of the Great Fowler.

I sail across the Sky, and Shu standeth erect and the Achmiu Stars(3.)
are instantly active in raising the ladder which lifts the Setting Stars
away from destruction.(4.)

And I bear that which repelleth mischief as I make my voyage over the
Leg of Ptah.

I come from the Lake of Flame, from the Lake of Fire, and from the Field
of Flame, and I live....

I stand erect in the Bark which the god is piloting ... at the head of
Aarru,(5.) and the Achmiu Stars open to me ... and my fellow
citizens(6.) present to me the sacred cakes with flesh.

                                 NOTES.

There is but one papyrus of the older period which contains any portion
of this chapter, and it does so very imperfectly.

On referring to M. Naville’s edition it will be seen that not only the
title but the greater part of the chapter is destroyed. The later copies
have texts so different from the original form, that it is unsafe to
attempt a restoration except within very strict limits.

It is absurd to attempt a translation from a mixture of divergent and,
at the same time, incorrect texts.

1. See note to chapter 74. The _Stream_ which is so conspicuous but
cannot be reached is the Milky Way, and the _Leg_ is the constellation
Cassiopeia in the Northern Sky.

2. _Stoop_, ⁂⁂⁂. This comparison occurs repeatedly in the
Pyramid Texts, and others of the early periods.

3. _Achmiu Stars_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ so _Ab_, giving another
proof that the word is to be taken as a _noun_, and not as a _negative_.

4. See chapter 30A, on “The Crocodile of the West who lives on the
Setting Stars.”

5. So _Ab_, but perhaps wrongly. I dare not fill up the lacunæ of this
text.

6. _Fellow-citizens._ The translation here is necessarily conjectural.
But I understand by _fellow-citizens_ (συμπολῖται) the dwellers of that
_city_ of which the deceased says, in chapter 17, “I arrive at my own
city, ⁂⁂.”[92] And this _city_ is explained by the ancient
scholion as being “the Horizon ⁂ [or, as Lepsius more accurately
translates it, ‘der Sonnenberg’] of my father Tmu.” It is no earthly
city that is thought of, but an eternal one.

-----

Footnote 92:

  I take this opportunity of correcting my former translation, where the
  preposition ⁂, which twice occurs in the passage, is both times
  rendered by the same word, _from_. But the sense of a preposition
  really depends upon the verb which it follows. The same English word
  will not suit the French _de_ in ‘s’approcher _de_’ and ‘s’éloigner
  _de_.’

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER XCIX.

        _Chapter whereby one Saileth a Ship in the Netherworld._


Oh thou who sailest the ship of Nu over that chine which is void,(1.)
let me sail the ship; let me fasten my tackle(2.) in peace; in peace!
Come, come; Fleet one, Fleet one! Let me come to see my father Osiris.

Oh thou who art veiled, let me enjoy happiness.

Oh thou who art clouded, but manful, and who sailest round over that
chine of Âpepi; thou of firm head and steadfast breast when coming forth
from the fiery blows: Oh thou who art at the ship, let me sail the ship,
let me fasten my tackle and come forth.

This place is empty, into which the starry ones fall down headlong upon
their faces,(3.) and find not aught whereby they can raise themselves
up.

Narrow is the path as the tongue of Rā.(4.)

[_The Patrol who goeth round, and who piloteth the Double Earth_; Seb
abideth stably by means of their rudders: _the divine Form which
revealeth the Solar Orb_: and _He who presideth over the Red ones_.(5.)]

Let me be brought in as a distressed mariner, and let my Soul come to
me, which is my brother, and go to that place which thou knowest.

_“Let me be told my name,” say_,

1. _The Mooring post._ “Lord of the Double-Earth in the Shrine” is thy
name.

2. _The Blade of the Rudder._ “Leg of Apis ” is thy name.

3. _The Hawser._ “The Side-Lock which Anubis fastens on to the swathing
work” is thy name.

4. _The Stern or Stem Posts._ “The two columns of the Netherworld” is
thy name.

5. _The Hold._ “Akar” is thy name.

6. _The Mast._ “Bearer of the Great one whilst she passeth” is thy name.

7. _The Keel._ “Backbone of Apuat” is thy name.

8. _The Mast-head._ “Throat of Emsta” is thy name.

9. _The Sail._ “Nut” is thy name.

10. _The Leathers._(6.) “Made of the hide of Mnevis, which Sutu hath
scorched,” is thy name.

11. _The Oars._ “Fingers of the elder” is your name.

12. _The Bracement._ “Hand of Isis, stanching the blood of the Eye of
Horus,” is thy name.

13. _The Ribs._ “Emsta, Hapi, Tuamautef, Kebehsenuf, He who taketh
captive, He who taketh by force, He who seeth his Father, and He who
maketh himself,” are your names.

14. _The Look-out_:(7.) “Master of the Grounds”(8.) is thy name.

15. _The Tiller_:(9.) “Merit”(10.) is thy name.

16. _The Rudder_: “The Umpire, beaming forth from the water,” is thy
name.

17. _The Hull_: “The Leg of Hathor, which Rā wounded, on his lifting her
into the Sektit Boat,” is thy name.

18. _The Boatman_: “Off” is thy name.

19. _The Breeze_, since thou art conveyed by me: “The Northern Breeze
proceeding from Tmu to the Nose of Chent-Amenta” is thy name.

20. _The Stream_, since thou sailest upon me: “Their Mirror” is thy
name.

21. _The Shallow_:(11.) “Destroyer of the large-handed at the place of
purification” is thy name.

22. _The Land_, since thou walkest upon me: “The Tip of Heaven, the
Coming forth from the swathings in the Garden of Aarru, and the Coming
forth in Exultation,” is thy name.

_To be said before them._

Hail to you, Fair in Form, Lord of issues, who are springing up for
ever, and whose double goal is eternity: turn to me your hands, give to
me food and offerings for my mouth; let me eat the _Bat_-bread, the
_Shensu_-cake and the _Kefen_-cake: let my place be in the great hall in
presence of the mighty god.

I know that mighty god to whose nostrils ye present delicacies. Tekmu is
his name: and whether he, whose name is Tekmu, turneth from the East or
advanceth to the West, let his course be my course.

Let me not be stopped at the Meskat; let not the Sebau have mastery over
my limbs.

I have bread in Pu and beer in Tepu. Let your largesses of this day be
granted to me; offerings of wheat and barley, offerings of _ānta_ and of
vestments, offerings of oxen, and ducks, which are offerings for life,
health and strength, and also offerings for coming forth by day, in all
the forms in which it pleaseth me to come forth in the Garden of Aarru.

_If this chapter be known he will come forth at the Garden of Aarru;
there will be given to him the_ Shensu-_cake, the measure of drink and
the_ persen-_cake, and fields of wheat and barley of seven cubits (It is
the followers of Horus who reap them), for he eateth of that wheat and
barley, and he is made whole in his limbs through that wheat and barley,
and his limbs spring up even as with those gods. And he cometh forth in
the Garden of Aarru in all the forms in which it pleaseth him to come
forth._

                                 NOTES.

One of the Paris papyri (_Pb_) contains a composition bearing the same
title as chapter 99, and M. Naville has published it as an introduction
to the usual chapter. It is no doubt of very great interest, but it is
the imperfect copy of a quite independent composition, which really has
no claim to be considered a part of our Book of the Dead.

1. See chapter 7, title and notes. _Cf._ the αἰθὴρ ἐρημος of Pindar and
the Latin expressions ‘vacuum per inane,’ ‘per inania.’

2. _Fasten my tackle_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂. _Cf._ Unas, 508 and 639. In
the latter place the ropes are said to be made of ⁂⁂⁂, _palm
leaf_ (?).

3. Comp. chapter 44 on the cavern where the dead fall into the darkness,
‘but the Eye of Horus supporteth me, and Apuat reareth me up.’ There may
be an allusion here, as there is elsewhere, to _shooting stars_. It is
worth noticing that--a group which ought, I think, to be read
⁂⁂⁂⁂ (_Ca_ and _Ac_) has in most papyri the wrong
determinative ⁂ instead of ⁂, which was misunderstood, and that
_Ab_ has even ⁂⁂⁂.

4. A corrupt passage, like the next.

5. The corruption of the whole passage between [ ] will be best
understood on comparing it with the names of “the Rudders of Heaven” as
given in chapter 148; the earliest text of these names being (I think)
the fine tablet in _Denkm._ III, 25 bis _a_. _Three_ out of four of
these names are represented by the phrases here printed in italics. The
rest is incoherent and was certainly not understood by the copyists. I
have followed _Aa_ in my translation.

6. ‘_The Leathers_,’ ⁂⁂⁂ or ⁂⁂⁂⁂, leathern
thongs, or straps, like the Greek τροποί for fastening the oars,

     Ἠρτύναντο δ’ ἐρετμὰ τροποῖς ἐν δερματίνοισι: _Odyss._ 4, 782.

See note of Scholiast and _cf._ Aesch. _Pers._, 376.

7. _Look out_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂, _see_ chapter 15, note 9.

8. _Grounds._ ⁂⁂⁂ is, technically, the superficial land
measure corresponding to the _quarter_ of the Egyptian _arura_. The more
general sense of the word (⁂⁂⁂⁂) is land enclosed and
parted out for cultivation.

The very ancient magical text (Unas 302) speaks characterically of
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, the Hippopotamus who maketh
his appearance at the garden (vineyard, field, &c. _Cf._ Psalm lxxx,
13).

In the great inscription published in Mariette’s _Denderah_, IV, 35,
⁂⁂⁂ is used, in a sense like that of the Ἀδώνιδος κῆποι, for
a stone vessel in which seeds were sown for ritual purposes.

9. _Tiller._ ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _bait_, or (as it is also written)
_ȧbait_; see chapter 76, note 1.

10. _Merit._ ⁂⁂ (sometimes written with ⁂ and other
determinatives; Bekenranef adds ⁂) is the name of each of the two
divine sisters, Isis and Nephthys, _see_ chapter 37, note; who are
called ⁂⁂⁂ and ⁂⁂. But, at Edfu, Denderah and Philae,
_Merit_ is a synonym of the _Ut’at_, and one of the names of Hathor.

11. _Shallow_; a conjectural meaning for ⁂⁂⁂, which has not
only the determinative of _land_, but those of water, ⁂ and ⁂.
And in some texts it would seem to mean _marsh_, _fen_, _swamp_.

                  ------------------------------------




                               CHAPTER C.

   _The Book whereby the glorified one is made strong, and is made to
  embark in the boat of Rā, together with those who are with the god._


Let me convey the divine Heron to the East, Osiris to Tattu. Let me open
the caverns of Hāpu,(1.) clear the path of the Solar Orb and tow along
Sekaru upon his sledge. Let the Great one give me strength at her fixed
hour.

I hail and give worship to the Orb, and associate myself with those in
adoration, I am one of them.

Let me be a second to Isis; and let her glorified ones give me strength.

Let me fasten my tackle, let me stop the adversary, and force him to
turn back his steps.

Let Rā lend me his two hands, let not his divine Boatmen prevent me. Let
my strength be that of the divine Eye, and conversely.

[As to the sundering of me in the Bark of Rā, let the sundering be as
that of the Egg and the Tortoise.(2.)]

_Said over the Figure in the Text, which is written upon clean paper,
with artist’s ink, fresh and mixed with essence of Ānta; let the dead
person have it put upon his body without inserting it into his limbs; he
will enter into the Bark of Rā at the round of each day, Thoth will
appreciate him, on his coming forth or entering, undeviatingly for times
infinite._

                                 NOTES.

This chapter appears a second time in the Turin _Todtenbuch_ as chapter
129. But in the papyrus of Nebseni it is found no less than three times.

1. _Caverns_ of Hāpu. Two of the copies of this chapter in the papyrus
of Nebseni give the interesting variant ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. ⁂ is
the well known equivalent of ⁂⁂, and the fountains of the Nile
are also indicated by the group ⁂.

2. This passage does not occur in chapter 129, and is apparently an
interpolation, which however is already found in ancient copies.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER CI.

             _Chapter of the Safeguards of the Bark of Rā._


O thou who art devoid of moisture in coming forth from the stream; and
who restest upon the deck of thy Bark: as thou proceedest in the
direction of Yesterday, and restest upon the deck of thy Bark, let me
join thy boatmen.

I am a powerful Chu.

O Rā, in that thy name of Rā, since thou passest through an Eye of seven
cubits, whose pupil is of three: do thou then make me sound, I am a
powerful Chu, let thy soundness be my soundness.

O Rā, in that thy name of Rā, since thou passest through those who are
perishing headlong: do thou then keep me standing on my feet. I am a
powerful Chu, let thy soundness be my soundness.

O Rā, in that thy name of Rā, since thou openest the secrets of the
Ammehit, which gladdeneth the hearts of the Divine Circle: do thou then
give me my heart. I am a powerful Chu, let thy soundness be my
soundness, and the soundness of thy limbs be the soundness of my limbs.

_Secured by reason of the writing with gum mixed with colours upon a
strip of royal papyrus, put at the throat of the deceased on the day of
burial. If these phylacteries are put at his throat, he will rise up as
one of the Divine Circle, and be united to the followers of Horus,
whilst his Lamp is made firm by Isis in heaven beside Sothis. He
followeth Horus who resideth in Sothis.(1.) His Shade becometh divine as
well as human. Vegetation is made to grow out of his body through the
goddess Menkit.(2.) He becometh a god for ever, and his limbs are made
vigorous in the Netherworld through Thoth, who hath done the like to
Osiris, in causing the light to rise out of his dead body; undeviatingly
and for times infinite._

                                 NOTES.

This chapter does not occur in the earlier collections known to us.

1. _Horus who resideth in Sothis_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂; _cf._
Teta, 277.

2. _Menkit_ is one of the names of Hathor, but the place is corrupt and
the true reading uncertain.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER CII.

          _Chapter whereby one entereth into the Bark of Rā._


O Great One in thy Bark, let me be lifted into thy Bark. Let me make
head for thy staircase. Let me have charge of those who convey thee, who
are attached to thee, who are of the Stars which never set.

That which I abominate, I eat not: and that which I abominate is Dirt,
let me not eat of it, but of peace offerings and of _Ka_-offerings, by
which I shall not be upset.

Let me not approach it with my hands, let me not tread upon it with my
sandals, because my bread is of the white corn and my beer of the red
corn of the Nile.

It is the Sektit boat and the Āātit which have brought me to the food
and raiment which are upon the altar of the Spirits of Annu.

Salutation to thee, Ur-ar-set, in that voyage of heaven and the disaster
in Tennu, when those dogs were gathered together, not without giving
voice.

I have come myself and delivered the god from that pain and suffering,
that was in trunk, in shoulder and in leg.

I have come and healed(1.) the trunk, and fastened the shoulder and made
firm the leg.

And I embark for the voyage of Rā.

                                 NOTE.

1. _Healed._ Such is the meaning of ⁂⁂⁂, as in chapter 147,
17, and Unas 214, no less than in a passage which does not occur in the
most ancient texts of chapter 17, but which is found in the papyri and
is derived from the early traditions. Thoth healed the face of Horus.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER CIII.

     _Chapter whereby one openeth the place where Hathor abideth._


I am a pure follower. O Ahi; O Ahi;(1.) let me become one of the
followers of Hathor.

                                 NOTE.

1. _Ahi_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, the _Striker_ is one of the names
of Horus, who in the inscriptions of Benihassan is called
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, “Horus who striketh down men.” The
notion of striking was in later days confined to the beating of
the sistrum. Priestly persons bore the title of _Ahi_ as
representatives of the youthful Horus, son of Hathor. See _Proc.
Soc. Bibl. Arch._, XII, p. 460, on “The Sun-stroke in Egyptian.”

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER CIV.

     _Chapter whereby one sitteth in the midst of the great gods._


Let me sit in the midst of the great gods. Let me pass through the place
of the Sektit boat. It is the Bird-fly deity(1.) that shall convey me to
see the great gods who are in the Netherworld, and I shall be triumphant
in their presence.

                                 NOTE.

1. _The Bird-fly deity_, Abait; _see_ chapter 76, note.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER CV.

            _Chapter whereby one propitiateth_(1.) _the Ka._


Hail to thee, my Ka, my coeval.(2.)

May I come to thee and be glorified and made manifest and ensouled, let
me have strength and soundness.

Let me bring to thee grains of incense wherewith I may purify myself and
may also purify thine own overflow.

The wrong assertions that I have uttered, and the wrong resistance which
I have offered: let them not be imputed to me.

For I am the green gem, fresh at the throat of Rā, given by those who
are at the Horizon: their freshness is my freshness [_said twice_], the
freshness of my Ka is like theirs, and the dainties of my Ka are like
theirs.

Thou who liftest the hand at the Balance, and raisest Law to the nose of
Rā in this day [of my Ka]: do not thou put my head away from me. For I
am the Eye which seeth and the Ear which heareth; and am I not the Bull
of the sacrificial herd, are not the mortuary gifts(3.) upon me and the
supernal powers [_otherwise said_: the powers above Nut].

Grant that I may pass by thee, and may purify myself and cause the
triumph of Osiris over his adversaries.(4.)

                                 NOTES.

1. _Propitiate_, ⁂. The simple root ⁂ _ḥetep_ signifies, what is
implied by the ideographic sign ⁂, the _taking hold_, _embracing_,
and kindred notions (_Proc. Soc. Bibl. Arch._, Vol. X, p. 578). The
notion of appeasing an angry personage is no more necessarily involved
in the Egyptian word than in the Latin _propitiare_. M. Léfebure’s
translation, _réunir_, in the title of this chapter is perfectly correct
as far as it goes.

See in _Denkm._, III, pl. 34, b, the picture of Thothmes III being
greeted by his _ka_. Rameses II and other kings are often represented in
the act of supplicating their own _ka_.

2. _My coeval_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂ or, as some might prefer, my _duration
of life_.

The pictures in the temple of Luxor (_Denkm._, III, 74 and 75) are well
known which represent the birth of Amenophis III. The infant prince in
each of these pictures is accompanied by his _ka_, his exact image. The
_ka_ is nursed and suckled by the same goddesses.

But perhaps the best commentary on our text is to be found in the
picture recently published by the French Mission Archéologique (_Temple
de Luxor_, fig. 203), in which both the royal infant and his _ka_ are
being fashioned by the hand of Chnum, upon his potter’s wheel.

3. _Mortuary gifts_ ⁂⁂⁂, meals offered to the
departed. The meaning of the compound group is plain enough
from the determinatives, and such frequent forms as
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ “consisting of bread and
beer,” but the origin of it is not so clear. The usual meaning of
⁂⁂ like that of the Coptic ϧⲣⲱⲟⲩ is _voice_, but in the present
group it stands for ⁂⁂⁂ corresponding to ϧⲣⲉ, plur. ϧⲣⲏⲟⲩⲓ,
τροφὴ, βρώματα, ἐδέσματα,, and ⁂ is to be understood as in the very
common formula ⁂⁂⁂⁂.

The reading ⁂⁂⁂⁂ which is sometimes found in late texts
is faulty and leads to an erroneous interpretation. ⁂ is a mistake
either for ⁂ or for ⁂, the phonetic of ⁂.

In such passages of the Pyramid texts as
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ (Unas 36)
⁂ is a demonstrative not a negative particle, “Here is the mortuary
meal presented for thee, and _here_ are the two Eyes, the White and the
Black, of Horus.”

4. All the early MSS. except _Pd_ omit this last passage.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER CVI.

      _Chapter whereby a largess is presented at Hat-ka-Ptah._(1.)


Oh thou god of nutriment, oh great one who presidest over the mansions
on high; [to whom bread cometh from Annu] ye who give bread to Ptah
[from Annu], give me bread and beer: let me be made pure by the
sacrificial joint, together with the white bread.(2.)

Oh thou ship of the Garden of Aarru, let me be conveyed to that bread of
thy canal; as my father, the Great one, who advanceth in the Divine ship
[because I know thee].

                                 NOTES.

This is one of the chapters found on the sarcophagus of Horhotep. It is
also inscribed on a statue, now in the Berlin Museum, belonging to the
early part of the XVIIIth dynasty (_Denkm._, III, 25 h and k). These
authorities do not give the title found in the papyri. The allusions to
Annu are confined to the earliest text, which somewhat differs from the
later authorities, and finishes sooner than they do. _Cf._ also _Teta_,
l. 331.

1. _Hat-ka-Ptah_ is the name of Memphis, but as in so many other places
it is not the earthly city which is meant. M. Naville has pointed out
that the words “in the Netherworld” are added in the papyrus of Nebseni.

2. Bread and beer are not mentioned in the earliest text, which has
other important variants. The latest texts have the verb ⁂⁂,
_wash_, _make clean_, _purify_, of which ⁂⁂⁂ on the Berlin
statue and the Theban papyri may fairly be considered an older form. But
Horhotep has ⁂⁂⁂, a different word and occurring in a
grammatical construction differing from that of the other texts.

The words ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ occur as a familiar formula in
the Pyramid texts (Unas, 185, 205; Teta, 91); but Horhotep interpolates
⁂⁂ after ⁂⁂⁂. The determinatives of the group
⁂⁂⁂ (sometimes ⁂ or ⁂), show that the copyist
understood the word as meant for the sacrificial joint.

It is not uninteresting to note, with reference to the correctness of
the title of this chapter, that the Pyramid ritual (Unas, 205) expressly
says of the deceased that “the sacrificial joint with the white bread”
are the “largess” (⁂⁂) which he receives.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XXVII.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER C.
  =Papyrus, Musée du Louvre,
  No. III, 93.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER C.
  =Papyrus, Boulaq Museum, No. 21.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER C.
  =Papyrus, Musée du Louvre,
  No. III, 89.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CII.
  =Papyrus, Musée du Louvre,
  No. III, 36.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CIX.
  ROSELLINI, “Mon. del Culto.,” pl. XXIII.
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CII.
  =Papyrus Brocklehurst, II.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CVIII.
  =Papyrus, Berlin Museum, No. II.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CIX.
  =Papyrus, British Museum, No. 9900.=
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XXVIII.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration: CHAPTER CX. =Papyrus, Leyden Museum.=]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER CVII.


[The chapter so called consists, in fact, of the first two lines of
chapter 109. The vignette over it really belongs to chapter 108. It has
no separate existence in any of the papyri of the best periods.]

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER CVIII.

         _Chapter whereby one knoweth the Powers of the West._


In respect of the Hill of Bachau(1.) upon which heaven resteth, it
presenteth itself(2.) three hundred cubits in length(3.) and two hundred
cubits in breadth.

Sebak, the Lord of Bachau, is at the east of the Hill, and his temple is
upon it.

There is a serpent on the brow of that hill, five hundred cubits in
length, three cubits of his forepart are pierced with swords.

I know the name of this serpent on his hill: “He who dwelleth in his own
flame” is his name.(4.)

Now, at the close of day(5.) he turneth down his eyes to Rā; for there
cometh a standing still in the Bark and a deep slumber within the ship.
And now he swalloweth three cubits of the Great Water.

Then Sutu is made to flee with a chain upon him of steel(6.) and he is
forced to vomit all that he hath swallowed. Then Sutu is put into his
prison.

               _And then he saith with Words of Power_:--

Away with thee! Steel, which art made fast upon my hand. I remain in thy
prison, the Bark sails on and thou seest the path; but thine eyes close,
[thine eye is delivered to me], thy head is veiled,(7.) and I go on and
stay thy steps.

I am the Manful one, who veileth thy head and who cooleth the hollow of
thy hand: thy strength is my strength.

I am the Master of the Words of Power.

Who is this who hath been delivered to me?

This Bright One, who cometh on his belly, on his hind parts and on the
joints of his back.

Lo! then, I come, and thy might is in my hand. It is I who carry away
thy might, that I may come and seize upon the Tunnels of Rā who is
united to me at sunset as he goeth round heaven.(8.)

But thou art pierced with hooks, as was decreed against thee of old.

I know the powers of the West, they are Tmu, Sebak the Lord of Bachau,
and Hathor, Mistress of Sunset.

                                 NOTES.

The chapters 108, 109, 112, 113, and 114 being so analogous to each
other, in form, matter, style, and composition, and each being concerned
with the divine _Powers_ ⁂ of some locality, it is interesting to
know that one at least of these chapters is found on a monument of the
Middle Empire. The others are probably not less ancient, and the text
published by Dr. Golenischef (_Zeitschr. f. Aegypt. Spr._, 1874, p. 84)
from the Sarcophagus at St. Petersburg already bears manifest signs of
antiquity.

Another sign of antiquity as regards the present chapter may be seen in
the numerous forms in which it has come down to us. These are so
different, and sometimes so irreconcileable, that it seems evident that
tradition has handed down very corrupt texts, and that the original
meaning of this chapter had been entirely lost at a very early date and
cannot be discovered now. The oldest text is the shortest of all, but it
is both imperfect and incorrect. The earliest papyri differ greatly from
the later ones. But both the earlier and the later papyri have the 149th
chapter which contains another recension of the 108th, and chapter 111
in the Turin and later papyri is another form of it.

1. The Hill of _Bachau_. ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ has for
determinative the sign ⁂ which connects the word with the Coptic
ⲃⲟⲩϩⲓ ‘eyelids.’ In the later texts the word has for determinative
either a _woman_ or a _cow_ in the act of parturition, as if it were
connected with ⁂⁂⁂ and its variants, with which
⁂⁂⁂⁂ another name of the Dawn is identified.

2. _Presenteth itself_, ⁂⁂. This Egyptian verb is always
expressive of activity, and perhaps ought never to be translated
_being_. ⁂ are ‘things which are,’ but ⁂⁂ are ‘things which
spring forth’ ‘come to light.’

3. The oldest text (which is here the best authority) does not give the
dimensions of the hill, but only of the serpent. The earliest papyri
give the dimensions of both, but make the hill so absurdly small that
the serpent could not rest upon it. Later papyri beginning with _Pf_
have corrected the texts so as to give the hill a length of 300 cubits,
or ⁂ (each of which is 100 cubits long). They omit the statement
that the cubit in question is of 7½ palms (the Royal cubit being of 7
palms), and also the interesting mention of the ⁂⁂⁂ “balance
(or measurement) of the earth.” The relation of this ‘balance’ to the
rest of the sentence is not clear, because the MSS. differ as to the
preposition which precedes.

The Papyrus of Nebseni gives the hill 300 cubits in breadth. The
_Todtenbuch_ of Turin reads 370 ⁂ in length, and 140 cubits in
breadth.

4. The serpent’s name is not mentioned in chapter 111, nor is it in the
earliest text. But in chapter 149 the usual name is ⁂⁂⁂, more
fully written ⁂⁂ in the Papyrus of Nebseni. The determinative
⁂ commonly attached to the name of Âpepi, expresses the meaning
‘sword smitten,’ ‘shot with swords,’ ξιφόκτονος. We might otherwise have
understood the term in the sense of ξιφοκτόνος, ‘slayer with swords.’
The Papyrus of Sutimes _Pd_ calls the serpent ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂
‘knife-wounded.’

The proper name ⁂⁂⁂⁂, also written ⁂⁂⁂,
_Māṭes_, an epithet of Âpepi, or of Sutu, also means “pierced with
swords.” But the expression itself seems sometimes to be found in the
active sense, “piercing like a sword.”

5. _Close of Day_, when daylight has come to ‘a _stand_’ ⁂⁂⁂.
This is the reading of the papyri. The oldest reading is
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ ‘at the time of sunset.’

6. The earliest text says nothing of this, though it mentions the
“prison of Sutech,” in a passage corresponding to what the papyri
include in the ‘Words of Power’ which follow. The Turin _Todtenbuch_
says that, “Sutu is put into his prison, and that a chain of steel is
put upon his neck.” Pictures of the serpent with the chain upon him will
be found in Bonomi, _Sarcoph._, plates 10 and 11.[93] There is an
evident fusion in this chapter, in its later form at least, as in
chapter 39, of the personages of Sutu and Âpepi.

7. _Thy head is veiled._ The ‘veiling of the head,’ and ‘closing of the
eyes’ of the sun are of course mythological terms for night time. But
the mythological event was celebrated on the festival called
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

8. Chapter 111 stops at the word “Sunset.” And after this, the text in
chapter 149 changes the third to the first person, and reads: “But I go
round the heaven whilst thou art pierced with hooks,” as if Rā were
replying to the words of Sutu. This, I confess, appears to me to offer a
better sense than that of chapter 108. And I should now alter the word
“stabber” in the first line of chapter 39 to “pierced with hooks.”

-----

Footnote 93:

  On this picture (plate 11) may also be seen an interesting
  illustration of chapter 39; the scorpion goddess putting the chain
  upon Âpepi, in front of whom are the divinities to execute, with
  swords and hooks, the decree passed against him. The children of Horus
  are also seen occupied in the execution.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER CIX.

         _Chapter whereby one knoweth the Powers of the East._


I know that Eastern Gate of Heaven (the South of it is by the lake of
Cha-ru, and the north of it by the stream of Reu), from whence Rā
saileth with favouring gales.(1.)

I am the Teller(2.) in the divine ship: I am the unresting navigator in
the Bark of Rā.

I know those two Sycomores of Emerald between which Rā cometh forth, as
he advanceth over what Shu hath lifted up,[94] to every gate(3.) through
which he proceedeth.

I know the Garden of Aarru: the wall of it is of steel. The wheat of it
is of 7 cubits, the ears of it of 2 cubits, the stalk of it of 4 cubits.
The barley of it is of 7 cubits, and the ears are of 4 cubits, and the
stalk of 3 cubits.

It is the glorified ones, each of whom is 9 cubits in height, who reap
them, in presence of the Powers of the East.

I know the Powers of the East: Horus of the Solar Mount, the Calf in
presence of the God,(4.) and the Star of Dawn.

A divine Domain(5.) hath been constructed for me; I know the name of it;
the name of it is the garden of Aarru.

                                 NOTES.

Another recension of this chapter has been incorporated into chapter
149. The differences lie chiefly in the order assigned to each of the
component sentences.

1. _Favouring gales_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ “_sailing breezes_,”
correspond to phrases like ἴκμενος οὖρος, venti secundi, trade winds,
tail wind, stern wind. There is not the faintest authority from the
older papyri (which are very numerous, and remarkably unanimous on this
point) in favour of the determinative ⁂, of the Turin _Todtenbuch_,
which gives the sense of violent or tempestuous winds.

2. _Teller_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

3. _Every gate._ “Rā at his rising is adored by the Powers of the East.
They it is who effect the rising of Rā, by opening the door at each of
the four portals of the Eastern horizon of heaven.” (Inscr. in tomb of
Rameses VI, Champollion, _Notices_, Tom. II, p. 640.)

4. _The Calf in presence of the god._ The _Calf_ is seen in the
vignettes of this chapter and also of chapter 1. Brugsch (_Rev.
Egypt_, I, p. 38) quotes texts showing that the Milch-cow
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _Hor-sechauit_, is the mother of the
Sun-god, and that the infant god is the calf to whom she gives birth.
The words “in presence of the god” are probably corrupt, but the
variants are apparently worse. The Morning Star was equally identified
with Horus.

5. _The divine Domain._ See M. Maspero’s important article “Sur le sens
des mots Nouit et Hait,” in _P.S.B.A._, XII, p. 235-257. “⁂ NOUIT
sert à désigner un domaine rural d’étendue plus ou moins considérable,
portant ou ne portant pas de village ou de maison d’habitation.... Il
était une personne réelle, formant un corps complet en soi, et c’est
pour cela qu’on le représente sous la forme d’un homme ou d’une femme
apportant des produits agricoles et des offrandes.”

                            ADDITIONAL NOTE.

The later copies of the Book of the Dead add a few lines to the chapter,
of which they certainly formed no part when first written. The most
interesting portion of them is as follows:--

“There are writings in thy possession for the grant of fields of
corn-land in which there sprouteth corn from the effluxes of the god
Ut’eb. The height of the corn is seven cubits, the ears of two cubits;
and thou shall reap it with the Glorified ones, in presence of the
Powers of the East. Thou shalt enter boldly at the mysterious portals
and be purified by those who are there.”

The name of the god hieroglyphically written ⁂⁂ was shown by me
(_Proc. Soc. Bibl. Arch._, Vol. VI, p. 187) to be _Uteb_ or _Ut’eb_.
Brugsch, apparently without having seen my note, came to the same
result, though he identified the god with Seb. The god is really Osiris,
and the text just quoted is illustrated by a picture of which various
copies are found. That here given is taken from the temple of Philae.

These pictures were known from the Ramesside period, but the
conception of Osiris which they convey ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂
(_Todt._, 142, 7) is of primitive antiquity. There is a chapter among
the texts preserved by the Coffin of Amamu (pl. xxvii, 6) about
“assuming the form of corn,” ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, and which
speaks of “the vegetation of life proceeding from Osiris, growing out
of the ribs of Osiris, and giving life to this generation of men,”
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

The same idea gave rise to the name ⁂⁂⁂⁂ which is given to
Osiris in the Book of the Dead, in the sacred texts of the Royal Tombs,
and in the Hymn to the Nile. But the god is also twice called
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ in Amamu, pl. xxvii, 8. This latter form
proves that in ⁂⁂⁂⁂ we have a compound term.

The deity (in very late times) appears in the feminine gender
⁂⁂⁂ (_Denkm._, iv, 57).

                  ------------------------------------

CX. The Chapter which in the printed copy of the Turin _Todtenbuch_ is
numbered 110 interrupts the series of chapters on the Powers of certain
localities. The translation of it is reserved till that of these
chapters is completed. It will be found at page 193.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER CXI.


is only a repetition of Chapter CVIII.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XXIX.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration: CHAPTER CX. =Bas Relief, Leyden Museum.=]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXII.
  =MARIETTE,
  “Abydos,” I, p. 83.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXII.
  =MARIETTE,
  “Abydos,” I, pl. 39.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXII.
  =MARIETTE,
  “Abydos,” I, p. 82.=
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XXX.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXII.
  MARIETTE, “Abydos,” I, pl. 10.
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXIII.
  MARIETTE, “Abydos,” I, pl. 29.
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXII.
  =Papyrus, British Museum,
  No. 9900.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXIII.
  =Papyrus, British Museum, No. 9964.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTERS CXII AND CXIII.
  MARIETTE, “Abydos,” I, pl. 31.
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER CXII.

         _Chapter whereby one knoweth the Powers of Pu._[(1.)]


Oh thou of corpselike form who art in Chait and Ânpit;(2.) thou goddess
of the Net,(3.) who art in Pu; ye who preside over the untilled lands,
ye stars and constellations(4.).... Know ye wherefore Pu hath been given
to Horus?

I know it if ye know it not.

It was Râ who gave it to him in amends of the blindness in his eye, in
consequence of what Râ said to Horus: “Let me look at what is happening
in thine eye to-day,” and he looked at it.

Râ said to Horus, “Look, pray, at that black swine.”

He looked, and a grievous mishap afflicted his eye.

Horus said to Râ, “Lo, my eye is as though the eye of Sutu had made a
wound in my own eye.” And wrath devoured his heart.

And Râ said to the gods, “Let him be laid upon his bed, that he may
recover.”

It was Sutu who had taken the form of a black swine, and he wrought the
wound which was in the eye of Horus.

And Râ said to the gods, “The swine is an abomination to Horus; may he
get well.” And the swine became an abomination to Horus.(5.)

And the circle of gods said, who were with him when Horus came to light
in his own children:(6.) “Let the sacrificial victims(7.) for him be of
his oxen, of his goats, and of his swine.”

As for Emsta, Hapi, Tuamautef, Kebhsenuf, Horus is their father and Isis
their mother.

And Horus said to Râ, “Give me then two(8.) brothers in Pu and two
brothers in Nechen, of this my own body; and that they may be with me as
an everlasting renewal, through which the earth flourisheth and storms
are quenched.”

And his name became that of Horus upon his Column.

I know the Powers of Pu: they are Horus, Emsta and Hapi.

                                 NOTES.

1. On the situation of _Pu_, see chapter 18, note 6. The Pyramid Texts
(Pepi I, 684) speak of the ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ “those of the
Red Crown who are in Pu.”

2. _Thou of corpselike form in Chait and Ânpit._ The sign of the plural,
here as elsewhere, is quite consistent with its application to a single
person. ⁂⁂ _Chait_ is the name[95] of the 16th, or Mendesian,
Nome of Northern Egypt, and Ânpit was its metropolis. The nome is
mentioned in the inscription of Amten in the third dynasty. The god is
Osiris. He is invoked in the “Lamentations of Isis and Nephthys,” and
asked to come to Tattu, Ânpit and Chait, which are but different names
of one Sanctuary, _Cf._ Brugsch, _Zeitschr._, 1871, p. 81, and his
translation of the Mendesian Tablet, _Zeitschr._, 1875.

3. _Thou goddess of the Net_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. This name
corresponds to the Greek Diktynna. The reason why a goddess representing
Heaven should be so called may be understood by the Homeric epithet
πολυωπόν applied to a net.

If, however, the deity was _male_, according to the other reading, the
reference is τὸν τῆς Ἴσιδος τρόφιμον Δίκτυν, who was drowned in the
river. Plut., _de Iside and Os._, 8.

4. _Ye who preside_, etc. Brugsch (_Zeitschr._, 1876, p. 3) identifies
the Egyptian ⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂⁂ with the ψιλοτόπος of the
Demotic and Greek contracts. The remainder of this invocation is so
corrupt that the sense cannot be safely guessed at.

5. See Herodotus, II, 47, without attaching too much importance to
details. The pig was certainly not considered impure (μιαρός) in the
days of the third or fourth dynasty, when Amten, who had risen to the
highest dignities, enumerates swine among the domestic animals it is
natural to possess. And impure animals were not offered in sacrifice.
But long before the days of Herodotus a change had taken place in the
Egyptian religion as to the nature of Sutu.

Plutarch and Aelian are to be read with the like caution. Some of their
information is correct, but it is mixed up with much error.

6. The variants ⁂⁂⁂⁂ and ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ are
noteworthy.

7. _Sacrificial victims_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂. The substitution in Egypt
of animal for human sacrifice is (I believe) _entirely_ without
foundation. And the supposed evidence of human sacrifices drawn from
certain pictures has (I believe) been misinterpreted..

8. The four _children_ of Horus were also his _brothers_. He asks for
_two_ of them to be with him in each of his two cities, Pu and Nechen.
The true sense of the passage is entirely lost in the later recensions
and in translations made from them.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER CXIII.

        _Chapter whereby one knoweth the Powers of Nechen._(1.)


I know the Mystery of Nechen: Horus, and that which his mother did(2.)
for him, when she herself uttered the cry: “Let Sebak, the Lord of the
Marshes, be brought to us.”

He cast the net for them and he found them, and his mother made them
fast in their places.

Sebak, the Lord of the Marshes, said: “I sought and I found the traces
of them under my fingers on the strand. I netted them in a powerful net,
as the net proved to be.”

And Râ said: “Verily, those are fishes in the hands of Sebak. and he
hath found the two arms of Horus for him, which had become fishes.”(3.)

And Râ said: “A mystery, a mystery, in the Net.”

And the hands of Horus were brought to him, and displayed before his
face, on the feast of the fifteenth day of the month; when the fishes
were produced.

Then Râ said: “I grant Nechen to Horus, in the place of his two arms;
that his two hands be displayed before his face in Nechen; and I grant
to him whatsoever is therein comprised on the feast of the fifteenth day
of the month.”

And Horus said: “Be it granted to me that Tuamāutef and Kebhsenuf be
taken with me, and that they be guards of my body in dutiful
service.(4.) Let them be this under the god of Nechen.”

And Râ said: Be that granted to thee, there and in Sati, and let that be
done for them which is done for those who are in Nechen; yea, they are
asking to be with thee.

And Horus said: Be they with thee, so that they be with me to listen to
Sutu invoking the Powers of Nechen: “Be it granted to me that I may make
my entry among the Powers of Nechen.”

I know the Powers of Nechen: they are Horus, Tuamāutef, and Kebhsenuf.

                                 NOTES.

1. _Nechen_, the chief hieroglyphic variants of which are ⁂, ⁂,
⁂ and ⁂⁂, was situated in the third nome (⁂ _Ten_) of
Upper Egypt, and was called by the Greeks Hieracōnpolis, ‘city of the
Hawks,’ from the hawk-headed divinities mentioned in this chapter as
Powers of Nechen, and of which numberless pictures are found on the
monuments.

2. Between these words and those which the three old papyri[96] _Aa_,
_Ae_, and _Ib_, which unfortunately do not agree together on all points,
have a few passages here which do not appear in the later papyri. They
read, “Horus and what his mother did, tossing in distressful agitation
(⁂⁂⁂⁂, ⲕⲓⲙ, σαλεύεσθαι) over the water.” The mother then
addresses persons who are not named, in words of which the sense is not
clear; and Rā speaks words of which the only certain ones are “the son
of Isis.” Then follows the usual text.

3. This legend of Nechen is connected with that of the dismemberment of
Horus (τὸ περὶ τὸν Ὥρου διαμελισμὸν), of which we have but very scanty
information.[97] It must have been like a repetition of what had
happened to his father Osiris. The limbs of Horus had been thrown into
the water, and when Sebak threw his net, at the prayer of Isis, he
brought up two fishes, into which the arms of Horus had been turned.

Reminiscences of this story are preserved in the names of several
localities. ⁂, “Two Fish,” is the name of the _Mer_ of the second
Northern Nome, and of the _pehu_ of the seventeenth Southern Nome; just
as ⁂, “Two Eyes,” is the name of the _pehu_ of the eleventh Northern
Nome. The latter name may perhaps have reference to Osiris, but the same
stories were probably told of both divinities.

4. _On dutiful service_ ⁂⁂⁂, a word omitted in the Turin and
other texts. Brugsch (_Rev. Egypt_, I, 22) has discussed the sense of
this word, and quoted numerous passages in illustration of it.

It is of course ridiculous to identify the word with the Hebrew אדן the
meaning of which is radically different.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XXXI.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXIV.
  =Papyrus, British
  Museum, No. 9900.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXIX.
  =Papyrus, Leyden Museum, No. V.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXVI. =Papyrus,
  Musée du Louvre, No. III, 36.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CVII. =Papyrus,
  British Museum, No. 9933.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXXIII. =Papyrus,
  British Museum, No. 9903.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXVII. =Papyrus,
  British Museum, No. 9900.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXIX.
  =Papyrus, Musée du Louvre.
  Cab. des Médailles.=
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER CXIV.

        _Chapter whereby one knoweth the Powers of Hermopolis._


Maāt is borne(1.) over the Arm,(2.) and Neith dawneth at Ment’ait,(3.)
and the Eye is illumined(4.) by the one who adjusteth its level.

I am led in by her, and I know what she bringeth from Kasu.(5.) I tell
it not to men; I repeat it not to gods.

I am come as a messenger of Rā, to make fast Maāt upon the Arm, for the
dawning of Neith at Ment’ait, and for restoring the Eye to him who
taketh the reckoning thereof.

I am come as omnipotent through the knowledge of the Powers of
Hermopolis, who love the Powers which you love.

I am one acquainted with Maāt made firm and permanent and reckoned out,
and I take delight in reckoning out that which is reckoned.

Hail ye Powers of Hermopolis, small at the beginning of the month and
great upon the Fifteenth Day; Rā teacheth the mysteries of Night, and be
it known to you that he who teacheth me is Thoth.

Hail ye Powers of Hermopolis as I know you.

                                 NOTES.

There are two chapters (114 and 116) of “the Powers of Hermopolis,” and
they have been preserved separately both in the older and in the more
recent papyri. They are very similar in thought but differently worded,
and each throws a certain light upon the other, without however
dispelling the obscurity of this very ancient religious composition.
Some farther help, however insufficient, is afforded by the pictures of
the Book which records the passage of the Sun-god through the twelve
hours of the night.

1. _Maāt is borne._ ⁂⁂ is the same word as ⁂⁂⁂, the
reduplicated form of ⁂⁂ _to gush_, _spring forth_. But in certain
cases it acquires the sense of _being borne_, or _conveyed_, and is
written ⁂⁂⁂ in Ptolemaic inscriptions. The corresponding word
in chapter 116 is ⁂⁂⁂⁂, which has the same meanings. One
of the pictures above alluded to (Lefébure, _Hypogées, Tombeau de Seti_,
part IV, pl. 31) represents a boat carrying the Moon-disk, raised upon a
stand.

A personage kneeling behind is supporting the feather of Maāt. The words
⁂⁂⁂, which are written by way of explanation, might give
rise to some misunderstanding were it not for considerations mentioned
in the following note.

2. _The Arm_ ⁂ in chapter 114 has for corresponding word
⁂⁂⁂⁂ in chapter 116 implying that _Arm_ is to be taken in
a geographical sense, as when we speak of an ‘arm of the sea’. Now the
pictures which have been spoken of have the words ⁂⁂⁂, ‘arm of
the Urnes,’ inscribed ever the stream down which the Sun-god takes his
nightly journey.

These pictures have only the value of a commentary on a very ancient
text, but they are at least as old as the earliest papyrus which
contains the text.

3. _Ment’ait_ ⁂⁂⁂, is the ancient reading in chapter 114, but
the later texts have ⁂⁂, _T’ar_. Chapter 116 has
⁂⁂⁂⁂, _Mat’ait_.

4. _Illumined._ The texts are discordant as to the reading. I follow
that of the two old papyri which have ⁂; though this orthography,
however defensible, is somewhat suspicious.

5. _Kasu._ ⁂⁂⁂, the ‘Burial Place,’ was the metropolis
of the 14th Nome of Southern Egypt. Dendera is called
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ and in more ordinary characters
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. Like very many other
geographical names, it has the feminine form in ⁂, as well as
the masculine in ⁂.

-----

Footnote 94:

  _I.e._, the Sky.

Footnote 95:

  Not _Ḥāmeḥit_, which is the name both of the _Uu_ of the nome and of
  the goddess worshipped in it, whose emblem is the fish ⁂.

Footnote 96:

  There is a copy of the chapter in the tomb of Chā-em-hait, which is
  our oldest authority. But it is unfortunately mutilated, and all that
  can be said is, that if the additional words were once there, they
  have been destroyed.

Footnote 97:

  The Apis tablets (_Zeitschr._, 1882, p. 22) give the name of a place
  _Pa-ḳerḳ-en Ḥor_, which seems to refer to this catastrophe; the Coptic
  ⲕⲟⲣϫ, ⲕⲱⲣϫ corresponding to the Greek ἐκκόπτειν, ἐκκλὰν, κατασπᾶσθαι.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER CXV.

 _Chapter whereby one cometh forth into Heaven, and openeth the Ammehit:
             and whereby the Powers of Heliopolis are known._


I have grown from yesterday, a Great one among the Great. I have raised
myself above all things that come into being.

The Face is revealed to the Eye of the Only One, and the round of
darkness is broken through. I am one of you.

I know the Powers of Heliopolis. Doth not the All-powerful One(1.) issue
from it like one who extendeth a hand to us?

It is with reference to me that the gods say: Lo, the afflicted one is
heir of Heliopolis!

I know on what occasion the Lock of the Male child(2.) was made.

Rā was speaking with Amhauf,(3.) and a blindness came upon him.

Rā said to Amhauf: Take the spear, oh offspring of Men.(4.) And Amhauf
said: The spear is taken.

Two brethren came into being: they were Heb-rā and Sotemanes, whose arm
resteth not; and he assumed the form of a female with a lock, which
became the Lock in Heliopolis.

Active and powerful is the heir of the temple; the Active one of
Heliopolis. The flesh of his flesh(5.) is the All-seer, for he hath the
might divine as the Son whom the Father hath begotten. And his will is
that of the Mighty one of Heliopolis.

I know the Powers of Heliopolis; they are Rā, Shu and Tefnut.

                                 NOTES.

The ancient text of this chapter has most unfortunately been lost. A few
words only remain in the fragments of Papyrus _Pm_. M. Naville has also
published what is found on an ostracon of the time of the XVIIIth
dynasty. There is no doubt that the form of the text which has been
handed down in the later papyri has suffered great alterations. And a
comparison between the Turin and Cadet papyri shows in how untrustworthy
a way this later form of the text has been transmitted.

Special attention has been given to this chapter by Mr. Goodwin
(_Zeitschr._, 1873, p. 104), and by M. Lefébure (_Mélanges D’Arch._,
1874, p. 155), whose work is very much more valuable than that of his
English colleague. But the most important study bearing on the relations
between the older and the more recent recension is that of M. Naville,
‘Un ostrakon égyptien,’ in the first volume of the _Annales du Musée
Guimet_.

1. _All powerful One_, ⁂⁂. M. Naville observes that this is
substituted for ⁂⁂, which is found on the ostrakon. Both terms are
divine names; the latter corresponding to the Greek πολυδερκής or
πανδερκής, was the title of the high priest of Heliopolis, who, like his
priestly colleagues all over Egypt, bore the titles of the god whom they
represented.

2. _The Lock of the Male child_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, is not a
‘curly wigged woman,’ as generally interpreted, but the side lock borne
by Horus, and princes and princesses, as well as by other priests and
priestesses, in honour of Horus.

3. _Amhauf._ See emendation proposed _infra_ at chapter 125, note 33.

4. _O offspring._ I follow the Papyrus Luyne in omitting the preposition
⁂.

5. _The flesh of his flesh_, or the _heir of his heir_. This may perhaps
be an assertion as to the hereditary succession of the high priest of
Heliopolis.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER CXVI.

         _Chapter whereby one knoweth the Power of Hermopolis._


Neith dawneth forth in Mat’at, and Maāt is conveyed upon the Arm of the
Eater of the Eye by him who reckoneth it out.

I know it, and I am therefore led in through the Sem priest.

I tell it not to men, I repeat it not to the gods (and conversely).

I enter as one who knoweth not, and seeth not.

Hail, ye gods who are in Hermopolis. Know ye me as I know Neith, that
the Eye may be made firm and permanent. I take delight in reckoning out
that which is reckoned.

I know the Powers of Hermopolis who are great at the beginning of the
month, and diminished at the fifteenth day.

They are Thoth the Unseen, Sau and Tmu.

_If this chapter be known, filth is avoided, and lye is not drunken._

                                 NOTE.

This is the last of the chapters concerning the Powers of certain
places. Of their positive antiquity there can be no doubt, whatever
alterations they may have undergone. But they are relatively modern with
respect to other chapters, _e.g_, the 17th. Mr. Goodwin used to compare
them with Christian legends of the mediæval period. These are ancient
enough as far as we ourselves are concerned, but no one would think of
judging by them of primitive Christianity.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER CX.

_The Beginning of the Chapters of the Garden of Hotepit, and of the
  Chapters of coming forth by day; and of entering and coming forth in
  the Netherworld, and of arriving at the Garden of Aarru, at the
  Rise(1.) in Hotepit and at the Grand Domain, blest with the breezes:
  that I may take possession there and be in Glory there: that there I
  may plough and mow: that there I may eat and drink and love: doing
  whatsoever things are done upon earth._


Horus is seized by Sutu: who looketh as one turning(2.) towards the
Garden of Hotepit.

But for me Sutu releaseth Horus: and the double path which is nigh to
Heaven is thrown open by Sutu. And Sutu taketh his portion of the breeze
through the Power of his own day,(3.) and he delivereth the bowels of
Horus from the gods below.

Lo, I sail the great Bark on the Stream of the god Hotep. I took it at
the mansion of Shu.

The mansion of his stars is again and again renewed.(4.) I sail upon its
streams that I may come to the domains thereof.

For I am in unison with his successive changes and his rules, and his
papyrus,(5.) and his attendant gods, and his chieftains. He reconcileth
the two Warrior gods with those who have the charge of food and the
beautiful creation which he raiseth up; and he reconcileth the two
Warrior gods with each other.(6.)

He severeth the mourners from those who quarrel with them: he putteth a
stop to them whose hand is violent against those weaker than themselves:
he keepeth within bounds the contentions of the Powers.

May I have possession there.

I know it, and I sail upon its streams that I may come to the domains
thereof.

My mouth is potent and secured against the Glorified that they may not
have the mastery of me.

May I have the investiture of thy Garden, O Hotep. What thou willest, do
thou it.

Let me be glorified there, and eat and drink there, and plough there,
and reap there, and grind(7.) there, and have my fill of love there.

May my mouth be potent there, let me there utter my Words of Power and
not be slighted.

              *      *      *      *      *      *      *

I am in possession of that Word of Power of mine which is the most
potent one within this body of mine here: and by means of it I make
myself either known or unknown.

I make my progress and I plough.

I take my rest in the divine Domain.

I know the names of the domains, the districts and the streams within
the Garden of Hotep.

I am there, I am master there, I am in glory there, I eat there; I plant
and I reap there; I plough there, and I take my fill of love. I am
united there with the god Hotep.

I cast my seed there, and I sail upon its stream that I may come to the
domains thereof, O Hotep.

Lo, my mouth is armed with sharp points. There is given to me the
abundance which belongeth to the Ka and to the Glorified.

I give the reckoning of Shu to him who understandeth it.

I sail upon its stream, and I range within the Garden of Hotep, for Rā
is in the sky, and Hotep is putting together the oblations.

I hasten to the land, and I fasten my stole upon me, that I may come
forth, and that that may be given to me which hath to be given; that I
may have joy and take possession of the wealth which Hotep assigneth to
me.

=Rise in Hotep=, I arrive in thee, my soul is with me, and my provision
is before the Mistress of the Two Earths, who maketh fast my Words of
Power, which recall to mind that which I have forgotten. Let me live
free from strife; and be there granted to me enlargement of heart.

Let my arteries be made fast, and let me have the enjoyment of the
Breeze.(8.)

Rise in Hotep, blest with the Breeze, I arrive in thee, my head is
uncovered: Rā sleepeth, but there waketh for me, and there shineth upon
me Hesit [the Cow-goddess](9.) who lieth at the confines of Heaven by
night.

He standeth in my way who heapeth against me his own dross.

But I am in my own domain.

=Great Domain=, I arrive in thee and I reckon up the abundance as I pass
on to Uach.(10.)

I am the Bull, raised on high in the Blue; the lord of the Bull’s field;
which Sothis describeth to me at her successive hours.

=Uach=, I arrive in thee, and I eat my cakes, and take possession of my
joints of flesh and meat and fowl.

The winged things of Shu are given to me, and my Kau follow me.(11.)

=T’efait=,(12.) I arrive in thee, I put on the stole and fasten upon me
the girdle of Rā, whilst he is in heaven,(13.) and the gods who are in
heaven are following Rā.

=Rise in Hotep, Lord of the Two Earths=, I arrive in thee: I salute the
stream of _T’eserit_.(14.) Lo, here am I, and all impurity is far from
me. The great one flourisheth ... I net the ducks, and I eat dainties.

=Kankanit=,(15.) I arrive in thee; that I may see my father and
attentively view my mother.

I take care to net the reptiles; and that which protecteth me is that I
know the name of that god who is next to T’eserit (goddess with flowing
locks and armed with horns), and who reapeth.

I myself plough and reap.

=Hesit=, I arrive in thee, and I encounter the Blue.

I follow the Breezes, and the company of the gods.

It is the Great goddess who hath given me my head, and he who fasteneth
my head upon me is the Great god, the Blue-eyed, who doeth according to
his own will.

=Userit=,(16.) I arrive in thee, in face of the mansion where food is
produced for me.

=Smait=,(17.) I arrive in thee. My heart is awake: my head is provided
with the White crown and I am conveyed over the heavens: and I make
those things to prosper which are below me: a joy to the Bull of the
gods above, the divine company.

I am the Bull, the Lord of the gods; and I make my way through the midst
of the Emerald ones.(18.)

=Isle of Corn and Barley=, divine district, I arrive in thee. I
encounter and I bear off that which proceedeth from the head of Rā: the
pair of horns which have the force of purification.(19.)

I make myself fast to the Block of Moorage on the heavenly stream, and I
utter my praise to the gods who are in the Garden of Hotepit.

                                 NOTES.

The text of this chapter handed down by the Turin papyrus and those
which agree with it contains nothing very difficult for a translator,
but on being compared with the older copies it is found to consist of a
collection of small fragments of the older text put together without any
regard to their original order or context. And about three-quarters of
the old chapter are suppressed in the new recension.

The editors of the fine papyrus of Sutimes in their notes upon this
chapter remark, that in the Turin text the sentences are in quite a
different order from that of their papyrus, “On peut y voir,” they say,
“l’effet de lectures et de transcriptions en rebours du sens, par des
scribes ayant mal compris les éditions en colonnes rétrogrades.”

This is, curiously enough, the very fault of the papyrus of Sutimes
itself, which is here wrong from beginning to end,[98] though probably
derived from an excellent original. It begins with the “Isle of Corn and
Barley,” and jumbles together quite incoherent sentences.

The oldest copy of the chapter yet discovered is that of the Tomb of
Chā-em-hait, at Thebes, and by a strange fatality it has been published
in such a form that in order to read it correctly, we must begin with
what is printed as line 11 and finish with line 1. We have it also in a
very incomplete condition. We miss the first eighteen lines contained in
the papyrus of Nebseni and the last words of every line.

The papyrus of Nebseni is the only complete text we have, and here as
well as elsewhere it is extremely incorrect. Some parts are so corrupt
that a translation must necessarily be dependent upon conjectural
emendations which can have no genuine claim upon the reader’s
confidence. We must be content with waiting till better authorities are
discovered.

The Gardens of Hotepit and Aarru are the Paradise, Elysian Fields and
Islands of the Blessed of the Egyptian imagination.[99] They were
supposed to be situated in the neighbourhood of the rising Sun, but
certain features were apparently suggested by the islets of the Delta.

The usual meaning of the word _Ḥotepit_, ⁂⁂,[100] when written
according to the orthography of the Pyramid Texts, is _oblations_,
_offerings_. This, however, is only a derived meaning. The word really
only expresses a _predicate_ of the things offered, as _putting
together_, _uniting_, _reconciling_; ⁂ _Ḥotep_ might signify _Rest_,
or _Peace_; very appropriate names for such a garden. ⁂⁂ is the
name of a god who dwells here.[101] There is also a goddess here called
_Ḥotepit_ ⁂⁂⁂, mentioned in the Pyramid inscription of Pepi I
(line 423), as mother of the great Scarab: and the same name is given to
Hathor in the temple of Dendera. The name of Ḥotep (with different
determinatives[102]) belongs to one of the islands of this blissful
place.

The Pyramid Texts furnish some interesting information not contained in
the Book of the Dead. We are told that the approach to the Garden is
over the Lake of Putrata (see chapter 40, note 1), that there is a great
lake (? that of Konsit) in the middle of the Garden of Ḥotepit, upon
which the great gods alight, and that the _Achmiu Sekiu_, the starry
deities who never set, there feed the departed from the _wood of life_
(⁂⁂⁂⁂ _lignum vitæ_) “upon which they themselves live, in
order that he too may live.” Shu and Tefnut are mentioned as divinities
of this place. But perhaps the most remarkable fact is that Horus had
enemies even here, who, however, were annihilated by the divine weapons
at the disposal of the departed worthy, who was led there in order that
“he might sit among the stars in heaven.”

And here it was that the beatified personage sat upon his throne of
steel, which was decorated in front with faces of the lion-god
⁂⁂⁂⁂ _Maaḥes_, the feet of it being the hoofs of the great
Bull _Sma-urà_, and extended his hand to the coming generation of men
(the ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂), whilst the gods approached him in
submissive attitude, and made offerings to him. It was, perhaps, from
these offerings that the Garden derived its name.

The Garden of Aarru, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ is often mentioned
in connection with that of Ḥotepit, and may perhaps be considered as the
most notable part of it. It is through its Gate that the Sun-god rises
up into Heaven.

It takes its name from a plant ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _ȧarru_ (later,
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, B.M. 551; ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, _Ag_,
Chapter 17; ⁂⁂⁂⁂,[103] _Ba_, Chapter 110, by phonetic
dissimilation of _rr_ into _nr_). The usual form in later times is
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, but we find even shorter forms in ⁂⁂,
B.M. 32, and ⁂⁂⁂. The determinative ⁂ of a reptile,
indicates a _creeping_, _climbing_, _twining_ plant, such as the
convolvulus, hop, or vine.[104]

The term ‘Garden’ implies in this connection nothing more than a
cultivated enclosure.

The names of different localities which are invoked by the deceased and
appear on the vignette of the chapter, have here been made prominent by
means of heavy type.

1. _Rise in Hotepit_, or (later on) _Hotep_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂ is the
name of one of the localities. The word ⁂ as I have often said, has
the sense of _rising up_, _coming to light_, _making an appearance_, and
like the Greek φαίνομαι is especially applicable to the appearance of
daybreak, or the rise of the heavenly bodies.

2. _Turning_, ⁂. The group has the apparent sense of _building_, but
the primitive sense is _turning_, as in the making of pottery. The
preposition ⁂ which follows it in this place seems to show that
building is not meant.

3. This, of course, sounds like nonsense, but so does the original as it
has come down to us. The papyrus of Ani, which reads ⁂⁂⁂,
forces the sense of _day_ upon the sign ⁂, which in the sense of
_turn_ would have been far more intelligible. There was the ‘Portion of
Sutu,’ and the ‘Portion of Horus,’ each being half the world,
topographically, or half the twenty-four hours as regards time.

I suspect that ‘day’ is a faulty interpretation of the ambiguous ⁂,
and that the true sense of the passage is that Sutu is satisfied with
the share which comes to his turn, and thereupon delivers Horus from
imprisonment in the lower world. The perplexity, or ignorance of the
copyists is seen in the very next words. One has ‘he who is in Merit,’
others ‘he who is in my mouth,’ and two ‘he who is in the egg,’ if this
be the sense of the very questionable group ⁂⁂⁂⁂, which
looks like a mistake for ⁂⁂⁂, a well known title of Anubis.

4. _Again and again renewed_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂.

5. _His papyrus._ So the word ⁂ _meḥit_, which occurs in the rubric
of Chapter 134, has hitherto been translated. But the vases ⁂ or
⁂, as determinatives, rather imply ‘inkstand’ or ‘palette for
holding colour.’ In this place it is the writing itself and not the
material, paper, ink or inkstand, which is meant. And from the entire
context Thoth is the god who is spoken of.

6. _He reconcileth the two Warrior gods with each other_,
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. The final
words _en ȧru-sen_ show the origin of the Coptic form ⲛ̀ ... ⲉⲣⲏⲟⲩ
_invicem_.

7. _Grind_ ⁂⁂⁂, the Coptic from of which is ⲥⲓⲕⲓ. From the
notion of ‘reducing to powder,’ that of the frequent word ⁂⁂⁂
‘wearing away,’ ‘decay,’ is derived.

8. _Let my arteries be made fast, and let me have the enjoyment of the
Breeze_, or _that I may have enjoyment_. The oldest meaning of the word
_artery_, ἀρτηρία, in Hippocrates, Aristotle and the earlier Latin
writers is _wind-pipe_, and, in the plural, _air-ducts_. But, even when
the word was also applied to what we call arteries, these were supposed
to convey _air_ whilst the veins conveyed _blood_. “Sanguis per venas in
omne corpus diffunditur et spiritus per arterias” is the classic
doctrine in Cicero (_de Natura Deorum_, 2, 55). Pliny says (_Nat.
Hist._, XI, 89), “arteriae carent sensu: nam et sanguine.” This error is
corrected by Galen, who has a treatise on the question “Whether Blood is
_naturally_ (κὰτα φύσιν) contained in the arteries?” The error of the
ancients arose from the arteries always being found empty after death.
The blood flowing from a wound inflicted upon them was inferred to have
been intruded into them by the rupture of the veins. The Egyptian
doctrine of the ‘arteries’ ⁂⁂⁂ (Coptic ϩⲁⲛⲙⲟⲩⲧ) in the head,
by means of which air is conveyed to all parts of the person, was first
found by M. Chabas in the _Berlin Medical papyrus_. The passage of the
Book of the Dead on which this note is written is no doubt the earliest
allusion to the doctrine.

9. _Hesit_ [_the Cow-goddess_] ⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂,
⁂⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂ is one of the many names of Isis or
Hathor. She is represented as suckling her son Horus (see picture in
Lanzone, p. 844), and it is this which characterizes her and from which
she derives her name. She is asked on the Louvre tablet (c. 14) for “the
white liquor which the glorified ones love.” This is distinctly called
‘milk’ on the Florentine tablet 2567, and vases of her milk are
mentioned (Dümichen, _Resultate_, 27, 6) in the inscriptions of Dendera.
A picture of her given in Dümichen’s _Historische Inschriften_ (II, 32)
identifies her with Hathor, and calls her “divine mother, mistress of
heaven and sovereign of the gods,” while others call her “the divine
mother and fair nurse.”

There can be no doubt about the right reading of the name which is
_Ḥesit_; the ⁂ is written in so many texts (see _Pepi_, I, 306,
_Amamu_, 21, 1, Lepsius, _Auswahl_, IX, and the form ⁂⁂⁂ at
Philae), that there is no reason for confounding the name with that of
_ḥetemit_. We must therefore attach no importance to this latter name
when applied in the vignette of the Turin _Todtenbuch_ to one of the
divine abodes which bears the name of the goddess, and is written
exactly like it.

10. _Uach_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂ _blooming_, _flowering_.

11. _The winged things of Shu are given to me, and my Kau follow me._

⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂, is a word of very rare occurrence. Birch
and Naville understood it of the _netting_, and Brugsch, of the
_pluming_ of birds. Both meanings may be disputed, but whatever Shu did,
was done to birds, and these are said to be given to the deceased.

The prayer that a person may travel over the blissful parts, followed by
his _kau_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, is repeatedly found on the
early monuments. Several papyri say that the deceased is followed by
‘the gods and the _kau_.’

12. _T’efait_ ⁂⁂, an abode abounding in ⁂⁂⁂⁂
_delicacies_.

13. _He is in heaven_ ⁂⁂⁂. The reading ⁂ to which
Brugsch at one time attached much importance, has turned out to be
one of the many blunders of the text of Sutimes. But the true
reading is not without its difficulties. If ⁂⁂ is taken as
equivalent to ⁂⁂ we have a strange anticipation of a change
in language of which the “enigmatical” texts of the royal
tombs[105] give the first intimation, but which first becomes
conspicuous in the demotic period. In a previous passage we have
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, where Nebseni has
⁂⁂⁂. But the important preposition ⁂ had already
dropped out of the earlier text of Chāemhait. The demonstrative
particle ⁂⁂ which occurs in both places may be rendered
‘there [he is],’ ‘le voilà.’

14. _I salute the stream of T’eserit_: a corrupt passage like so many
others in this chapter. The first word ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ ‘salute’
is rare but correct and well attested. The proper name is but one of the
contradictory readings. It has, however, the advantage of being a real
name and suitable to the passage, being that of a goddess mentioned in
connection with the next abode. ⁂⁂⁂ _T’eserit_ is a name
corresponding to the classical Ἀγλαιαv or Clara.[106] In the texts of
the Royal Tombs she is named as goddess in ⁂⁂ _Cher-āba_. And
here[107] she is depicted as the goddess with long or flowing locks
(εὐπλόκαμος) and armed with horns. She is one of the forms of Isis or
Hathor.

15. _Kankanit_ is etymologically akin to the verb of _beating_ (_see_
Chapter 17, note 20), but there is no reason from the notice here to
suppose that this was a place of punishment.

16. _Userit_ ⁂⁂⁂ is one of the commonest appellatives of Isis,
especially in the later texts. The names of all these abodes, situated
in that region of the sky where the sun rises, are derived from the
notion of daybreak.

17. _Smait_, another of these appellatives, _see_ Chapter 62, note 1.

18. _The Emerald ones_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂, those who are in the emerald
light of the dawn. The sun rises (Chapter 109) through two sycomores of
emerald.

19. _Which have the force of purification_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂. The
syllable _āb_ expresses the word signifying _horn_ as well as that
signifying _purification_.

The vignettes of the chapter which are here given from different
authorities are explained in their proper place.

-----

Footnote 98:

  See M. Naville’s remarks, _Einleitung_, p. 156.

Footnote 99:

  _Mission Arch._, I, p. 125.

Footnote 100:

  Also written = ⁂⁂ (_Unas_, 422 and elsewhere).

Footnote 101:

  The garden is also called ⁂⁂⁂. Another form is
  ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ (_Pepi_ I, 309).

Footnote 102:

  ⁂⁂ _Nebseni_, ⁂⁂ _Sutimes_, ⁂⁂ in all the
  later papyri.

Footnote 103:

  Compared with ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ in the papyrus of
  Nesichonsu, published by M. Maspero, _Miss. Arch._, I, p. 612.

Footnote 104:

  The Pyramid Texts have the invocations (_Unas_, 597), “Hail to thee,
  Horus, in the domains of Horus; Hail to thee, Sutu, in the domains of
  Sutu; Hail to thee, Lion (⁂⁂⁂ _Ȧar_), in the Garden of
  Aarru.”

  Another derivation is suggested in the “Destruction of Mankind,” line
  39, ⁂⁂⁂ (as I read it) an augmented form of ⁂⁂,
  _ar_, which does not mean _pluck_, as in Brugsch’s translation, but
  _bind_, _fasten_, _twine_, _nectere_, _constringere_, _convolvere_.
  This sense would explain the ancient determinatives ⁂, ⁂,
  and lead to still more interesting results. For the ancient word
  ⁂⁂⁂⁂, _ȧarerit_, ‘a vine,’ has thus clearly the same
  etymological sense as our European word _vine_. “_Vî-num_ ... attaches
  itself to _vî-tis_, _vî-men_, _vî-tex_, and--exactly like the Greek
  ϝοῖ-νος--to the Indo-Greek root _vei_, ‘to twine.’ So that _vî-no_
  means first ‘creeper,’ then ‘fruit of the creeper,’ finally ‘drink
  made from the fruit of the creeper’” (O. Schrader, _Prehistoric
  Antiquities_, 324).

  Philological speculation might make a further advance.

  As ⁂⁂⁂ _ȧar_, is to ⁂⁂ _ār_, so perhaps is
  ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _ȧarru_ to ⁂⁂ _āru_. The first two
  groups are not phonetically identical, but they are certainly allied
  and have very much the same meaning; the last has, with some
  probability, been identified with the _Vine-branch_, and that, in
  conjunction with the text ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ (see
  _Zeitschr._, 1878, p. 107, and the plate corresponding). “The
  Vine-plant is Osiris.” The Greeks, or some of them at least,
  identified Osiris with Dionysos (Plutarch, _de Iside et Osiride_, 34,
  35). The god is sometimes (as in the papyrus of Nebseni) sitting in a
  naos under a vine, from which bunches of grapes are hanging.

Footnote 105:

  Here we already have ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂,
  ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ and ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. See
  my article in the _Zeitschr._, 1874, p. 102.

Footnote 106:

  It is also the name of a liquid substance ⁂⁂, ⁂⁂,
  a produce of the cow, such as cream or clarified butter. It occurs in
  all the lists of offerings.

Footnote 107:

  A reference to M. Naville’s collation of this chapter (line 40), will
  show the corruption and uncertainty of the text which precedes the
  name of the goddess. If we look beyond the authorities given by M.
  Naville, the difficulties are multiplied. The papyrus of Queen
  Net’emit in the Louvre, for instance, instead of ⁂⁂⁂⁂
  _etc._, reads, ⁂⁂⁂.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER CXVII.

     _Chapter whereby one taketh the blissful path at Restau._(1.)


O paths which are high above me at Restau: I am the Girdled(2.) and the
Mighty one, coming forth triumphantly.(3.)

I am come: I am come that I may firmly secure my suit in Abydos,(4.) and
that the path may be open to me at Restau.

Let my suit be made pleasant for me by Osiris.

I am he who produceth the water which balanceth his throne, and who
maketh his way from the Great Valley.(5.)

Let the path be made for me; for behold I am _N_ the triumphant.(6.)

[Osiris is made triumphant over his adversaries, and the Osiris _N_ is
made triumphant over his adversaries, and is as one of you, his
patron(7.) is the Lord of Eternity: he walketh even as ye walk, he
standeth as ye stand, he speaketh as ye speak, before the great god, the
Lord of Amenta.]

                                 NOTES.

1. This chapter and the following have reference to Restau, one of the
Gates between the Netherworld and Heaven.

It is not mentioned in the most ancient recension of chapter 17 (from
which my translation was taken), but in all the papyri of the eighteenth
and later dynasties it is stated that Restau was a gate south of
An-aaref and north of the “Domain (⁂⁂⁂) of Osiris.”

The papyrus of Ani has this picture of it,

[Illustration]

but the most interesting representations of it are in the Dublin papyrus
(_D. a_), where the Sun god is seen passing between the folding doors,
and in the papyrus of Hunefer (_A. g_), where the doors are also open
and the god is sitting between them. (_See_ Plates VI, 11 and VIIb.)

The name _Restau_ ⁂⁂⁂ (the feminine form ⁂⁂⁂ is
more frequent in later texts) signifies _Gate of the passages_. These
are the passages guarded by the faithful attendants of Osiris, but armed
with “hurtful fingers” against the adversaries of Rā, against whose
onslaught the deceased prays Rā for protection in chapter 17.

A mystical interpretation will be found in chapter 119 and note.

2. _Girdled_, or _stoled_, ⁂⁂. On the importance attached to
this ritual investiture, the following references may (among many
others) be useful: _Unas_ 66, _Teta_ 149, _Pepi_ I, 395, _Merenrā_ 190,
_Todt._ 125 (rubric), 145, 25. The deceased prays (Chapter 82, 4) that
he may be girt by the goddess Tait. A passage in _Todt._ 78, 26 (Turin
text) would be of greater interest were it not an emendation of those
who no longer understood the ancient text.

3. _Coming forth triumphantly._ This is the reading of the oldest
authority (Nebseni), but the reading which has prevailed, not only here,
but in Chapter 147, is “coming forth from the Crown,” ⁂⁂⁂.

4. _That I may firmly secure my suit at Abydos._ The scholion on Chapter
17, referred to in note 1, states that the “place of Maāt is at Abydos.”
It is, of course, the mystical, not the geographical, Abydos which is
meant, and the _suit_ ⁂⁂ (_res_) which has to be settled is the
final judgment of the deceased.

5. The throne of Osiris in pictures of the Psychostasia (_see_ Vignettes
to Chapter 125) rests upon water, out of which there springs a lotus
flower; and upon this flower stand the four children of Horus. In a
passage of chapter 147, which is an adaptation of the present chapter,
the deceased says ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _La_, “I am he
whose stream is secret.” And a Pyramid Text (_Merenrā_, 188, 193) after
mention of the Great Valley ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ and of the investiture
(⁂) proceeds, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, “thy
water, thy fresh current, is a great inundation proceeding from thee.”
Here the deceased is identified with the Nile and its inundation, as in
Chapter 64 of the Book of the Dead.

6. The chapter ends here. The passage which follows in the translation
is taken from the Paris papyrus _Pe_.

7. _Patron_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, a word supposed by some scholars to
signify uncle. It occurs on funereal monuments among the designations of
persons connected with the deceased, such as brother, sister, nurse. A
man may have several bearing the designation, and they are not
necessarily children of the same parents (_see e.g._, Mariette, _Cat.
d’Abydos_, p. 110, where a man has five _chenemesu_, who cannot all be
brothers either of his father or his mother). The word occurs repeatedly
in the Prisse papyrus. I am inclined to think it means the legal
guardian of a minor.

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER CXVIII.

               _Chapter whereby one arriveth at Restau._


I am he who is born in Restau.

Glory is given to me by those who are in their mummied forms in Pu, at
the sanctuary of Osiris, whom the guards(1.) receive at Restau when they
conduct Osiris through the demesnes of Osiris.

                                 NOTE.

1. _Guards_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _ȧaku_, the same personages as
those mentioned in Chapter 28, note 2, and they seem to me to be
identical with the “wardens of the passages,” Chapter 17, “attendant
upon Osiris.” There is an imperfect tablet of the 12th dynasty at
Hamamāt (_Denkm._, II, 138, c) in which thirty ⁂⁂⁂ are
mentioned along with the soldiers and other persons belonging to the
expedition. The Pyramid Texts have the word ⁂⁂ but apparently with
a determinative of salutation, ⁂. (_Pepi_ I, 160, _cf._ line 82.)

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER CXIX.

       _Chapter whereby one entereth or goeth forth from Restau._


I am the Mighty one, who createth his own light.

I come to thee, Osiris, and I worship thee.

Pure are thine effluxes,(1.) which flow from thee,(2.) and which make
thy name in Restau, when it hath passed there.

Hail to thee, Osiris, in thy power and thy might, who hast possession of
Restau.

Osiris raiseth thee up in thy power and in thy might. Osiris raiseth
thee up in thy power in Restau, and in thy might in Abydos, that thou
mayest go round heaven with Rā, and survey the human race.[108]

One art thou and triumphant.

                                 NOTES.

1. _Pure are thine effluxes._ The true reading is
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, a phrase which recurs in these texts. The
suffix ⁂ of the first person, which is sometimes added to the first
word, would give the sense “thine effluxes are my purification.” On the
meaning of ⁂⁂⁂, _see_ 65 B, note 4. At the end of Chapter 149
the deceased prays, “let me be joined, let me be united with the sap
which proceedeth from Osiris; let me not be parted from him.”

2. _Which flow from thee._ ⁂⁂⁂⁂, _sta_, which has here the
same meaning as when the Nile is said (_Denkm._, III, 13) _to flow into
the Great Sea_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. The name of Restau
is here derived from the effluxes _flowing_ (_stau_) from Osiris.

The various meanings of ⁂⁂⁂⁂, and of the Coptic ⲥⲉⲧ, are
all traceable to the notion of _sending forth_, _throwing_, and are
easily illustrated from the Greek. Thus ἐκβάλλειν is used for the
discharge of a river into the sea; ἐκβολαὶ are ‘passes, passages.’ Doors
are secured by pushing the bolts, μοχλοὺς ἐπιβάλλειν; they are opened by
_shooting back the bolt_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂ (Mariette, _Abydos_, p.
58). ⁂⁂⁂⁂ is exactly the reverse of ἐπιβάλλειν σφραγῖδα.
⁂⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂, ⲥⲟⲧ, _stercus_ is an ἐκβολή,
_dejectio_. And ⁂⁂⁂⁂, ⁂, ⲥⲀϯ, ⲥⲟⲧⲉ, βέλος, βολὶς,
⁂⁂⁂, ⲥⲁⲧ, _seminare_, and ever so many others are all
determinations of one and the same concept.

In such passages as ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂
and the like, _sta_ has the sense not of _towing_, but of πομπή, ‘solemn
_procession_.’ It occurs even where towing is out of question, _e.g._,
in the march of military men ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ (Tombs of Amenemheb
and Pehsukher, _Miss. Arch. Française_, V, pp. 229 and 289).

And ⁂⁂ _string_, _rope_ is connected with the notion of
‘throwing’ like our own _warp_ with _werfen_ (Goth. _vairp-an_) and
ῥίπ-τω.

-----

Footnote 108:

  The ⁂⁂⁂⁂, _Rechit_, mankind actually, living, as
  distinguished from the dead or yet unborn.

Chapter CXX is a repetition of Chapter XII.

Chapter CXXI is a repetition of Chapter XIII.

Chapter CXXII is a repetition of Chapter LVIII.

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER CXXIII.

       _Chapter_(1.) _whereby one entereth into the Great House._


Hail to thee, O Tmu, I am Thoth.

I have equally balanced the Divine Pair, I have put a stop to their
strife, I have ended their complaints.

I have rescued the Âtu from his backward course.

I have done what thou hast prescribed for him.

And I rest since then within my own Eye.

I am free from obstruction; and I come that thou mayest see me in the
house where I repeat the ancient ordinances and words, as a guidance
wherewith thou shalt guide posterity.(2.)

                                 NOTES.

1. This chapter (which is repeated in Chapter 139) is like the
repetition of an important passage in Chapter 110. But the differences
are very considerable, and it is for criticism to decide the question of
priority between the two recensions.

Whichever be the earlier recension, the present one is of very great
interest and importance. It is found on two of the most carefully
written papyri of the eighteenth dynasty. But the most interesting
feature is the mythological allusion at this date (_at latest_) to an
astronomical phenomenon, with reference to which later researches may
furnish fresh evidence.

The speaker in this chapter is said (not merely implied, as in Chapter
110, _see_ note 5) to be Thoth, who is the measurer of all things in
heaven and earth, and the author and regulator of all science. He is
here said to have established the _equilibrium_ ⁂⁂⁂ between
the Divine Pair, Horus and Sutu; that is Day and Night. Such an
equilibrium, strictly speaking, never exists except at the _Equinoxes_.

But the most important passage is, “I have rescued the _Âtu_ from his
backward course.” The ⁂⁂⁂ _Âtu_ is a mythological _fish_, who
is represented as following the course of the Bark of Rā. The meaning of
the name is, _the Cleaver_, _Divider_, _Cutter in two_ ⁂⁂. It is
one of the appellatives of the Sun-god, with reference to his path
through the sky. But what is that solar phenomenon specially deserving
to be characterised by its _motion backwards_ ⁂⁂⁂?

I do not think any astronomer would hesitate to answer, that
_Precession_ is meant. The cause of Precession could only be known to
really scientific philosophers (which is out of question in this case),
but the _phenomena_ would necessarily be noted by those who had
important interests in keeping their calendar correct.[109] Even the
Chinese, by dint of records and without any mathematics, came to infer
the precession of the equinoxes; so did the Egyptians apparently at a
very much earlier period; and Hipparchus, who has the credit of the
discovery, may have learnt it from them.

Although ⁂⁂ is commonly represented as a _fish_, the same name
is given to a _Crustacean_ ⁂, ⁂ whose organs of locomotion are
specially adapted for backward motion.

“_Rescuing_ the Âtu from its backward course” can mean nothing less than
being able to _correct_ or (in technical language) to _equate_ the
phenomena.

It might perhaps be suggested that the backward course here spoken of
has reference to the year of 360 days, corrected at an early period by
the addition of the five supplementary days. This would certainly have
been a very probable explanation of the clause, but for the direct
connection which this has with what precedes, concerning the equilibrium
between Day and Night; that is, the Equinox.

2. _Posterity_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ literally, _minores_. The
word in the present context seems to have a different meaning from what
it has in Chapter 110, where it is put in contrast with
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ violent ones, against whom Thoth interposes his
protection.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XXXII.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXXV.
  =Papyrus, Musée du Louvre, III, 36.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXXV.
  =Papyrus, Musée?] du Louvre, III, 89.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXXV.
  =Papyrus, Musée du Louvre, III, 93.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXXV.
  =Papyrus du Louvre, III, 9.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXXV.
  =Papyrus, Ani.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXXV.
  =Papyrus du Louvre, III, 9.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXXIV.
  =Papyrus, Musée du
  Louvre, Cab. des Médaille=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXXV.
  =Papyrus, Paris, Sketch by Mr. Renouf=
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XXXIII.

                            BOOK OF THE DEAD

[Illustration: CHAPTER CXXV. =Papyrus Brit. Mus., No. 9,901, and Papyrus
Leyden, No. 11.=]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER CXXIV.

      _Chapter whereby one cometh to the Divine Circle of Osiris._


My soul buildeth for me a Hall(1.) in Tattu and I flourish in Pu.

My fields are ploughed by those who belong to me: therefore is my palm
tree like Amsu.

Abominations, abominations, I eat them not. I abominate filth, I eat it
not.

[Peace offerings are my food, by which I am not upset.]

I approach it not with my hands; I tread not upon it with my sandals;
for my bread is of the white corn and my beer of the red corn of the
Nile.

It is the Sektit boat, or it is the Atit boat, which bringeth them to
me, and I feed upon them under the foliage of the Tamarisk.(2.)

I know how beautiful are the arms which announce Glory for me(3.) and
the white crown which is lifted up by the divine Uræi.

O thou Gate-keeper of him who pacifieth the world, let that be brought
to me of which oblations are made, and grant that the floors may be a
support for me, and that the glorious god may open to me his arms, and
that the company of gods be silent whilst the Hammemit(4.) converse with
me.

O thou who guidest the hearts of the gods, protect me and let me have
power in heaven among the starry ones.

And every divinity who presenteth himself to me, be he reckoned to the
forerunners of Rā: be he reckoned to the forerunners of Light and to the
Bright ones who deck the sky amid the Mighty ones.

Let me have my will there of the Bread and Beer with the gods; that I
enter through the Sun-disk and come forth through the Divine Pair, that
the gods who follow may speak to me, and that Darkness and Night may be
terrified before me in Mehit-urit, by the side of him “Who is in his
Sanctuary.”

And lo I am here with Osiris. My measure is his measure(5.) among the
mighty ones. I speak to him the words of men and I repeat to him the
words of gods.

There cometh a glorified one, equipped, who bringeth Maāt to those who
love her.

I am the Glorified one and the Equipped. And better equipped am I than
any of the Glorified.

                                 NOTES.

1. _Hall_ ⁂,⁂[,⁂⁂⁂, or ⁂⁂ _ḫent_, the πρόναος,
πρόδομος, ‘Vorsaal,’ first room of a temple or palace. The sense of
_harîm_ which has been ascribed to it in certain texts is entirely
erroneous. The temple inscriptions (see Brugsch, _Zeitschr._, 1875, p.
118, and fol., and Mariette, _Denderah_, I, 6) leave no doubt on the
subject. If there were “ladies of the royal antechamber,” it by no means
follows that they were wives or concubines of the king, and hall or
antechamber convey a very different idea from that of the most reserved
portion of the house.[110]

Pictures and inscriptions on mummy cases identify the term
mythologically with that portion of the sky whence the first rays of the
rising sun are visible.

The mention of the word in the Pyramid Texts (_Pepi_, I, 672) is in
connection with the notion of food, ⁂⁂.

2. We have here a repetition of passages to the same effect as in
Chapters 53 (A and B) and others. The Pyramid Texts (_Teta_, 344) have a
section nearly identical.

3. _The arms which announce Glory for me._ The clue to the meaning of
this passage is to be found in ⁂, which is a _relative_ form
implying an antecedent, which can only be “the arms.”

The _arms which announce Glory for me_ are to be explained by the usages
of the ancient ritual, which prescribed certain postures or attitudes in
the ceremony of ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, as in other forms wherein the
arms played a great part. These religious ceremonies it must always be
remembered, were considered as dramatic representations of what was done
in the invisible world.

4. _The Hammemit_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, or
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, the
generations of human beings yet unborn.

5. _My measure is his measure_. The meaning of ⁂⁂⁂⁂ or
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ can only be inferred from the form
⁂⁂⁂⁂ which occurs repeatedly in the great Harris Papyrus
and some other documents.

The scribe of the Turin _Todtenbuch_ carelessly omitted the second part
of the phrase, and therefore altered the grammatical construction. This
is how M. Pierret came to conjecture the sense ‘proclaim,’ which is not
suggested by any of the ancient authorities, or even by the later ones.
The reading of the Leyden Papyrus T, 16 is identical with that of the
oldest papyrus.

-----

Footnote 109:

  “The amount of this motion by which the equinox travels backward, or
  retrogrades (as it is called), is _per annum_ an extremely minute
  quantity, but which, by its continual accumulation from year to year,
  at last makes itself very palpable, and that in a way highly
  inconvenient to practical astronomers, by destroying, in the lapse of
  a moderate number of years, the arrangement of their catalogues of
  stars, and making it necessary to reconstruct them.” Herschel,
  _Astronomy_, chapter 4.

Footnote 110:

  The ⁂⁂⁂⁂ mentioned in the tablet of Pa-shere-en-Ptah
  are not concubines, as Brugsch and others have thought, but female
  children, as Birch rightly asserted. Cf. my _Hibbert Lectures_, p. 79,
  note. It is the feminine form of ⁂⁂⁂⁂.

  There is also another word, ⁂⁂, applied on the walls of tombs
  to persons (_male_ as well as female) executing certain gymnastic
  movements.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XXXIV.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.


[Illustration:

  Fig. 11. CHAPTER CXXV.
  =Sarcophagus of Sebek-āa, Berlin Museum.=
]

[Illustration:

  Fig. 12. CHAPTER CXXV. LEPSIUS, “Denkmäler,” Abth. III, Bl. 232.
]

[Illustration:

  Fig. 13. CHAPTER CXXV.
  LEPSIUS, “Denkmäler,” Abth. III, Bl. 232.
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XXXV.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration:

  Fig. 14.
  CHAPTER CXXV. =Papyrus, Leyden Museum, No. 1.=
]

[Illustration:

  Fig. 15.
  CHAPTER CXXV. LEPSIUS, “Denkmaler” Abth. III, Pl. 78.
]

[Illustration:

  Fig. 16.
  CHAPTER CXXV. =Papyrus of Ani, British Museum.=
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XXXVI.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.
                         CHAPTER CXXV (Notes).

[Illustration:

  Fig. 17. LEPSIUS, “Denkmäler,” Abth. III, Bl. 39.
]

[Illustration:

  Fig. 19. MARIETTE, “Deir el Bahari,”
  Pl. VIII.
]

[Illustration:

  Fig. 20. ROSELLINI, “M.C.,” Pl. LI.
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: Fig. 18. LEPSIUS, “Denkmäler,” Abth. III, Bl. 39.]

[Illustration:

  Fig. 21. ROSELLINI,
  “M.C.,” Pl. LII.
]

[Illustration:

  Fig. 22. ROSELLINI, “M.C.,” Pl. LII.
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER CXXV.

                                PART I.

Said on arriving at the Hall of Righteousness, that _N_ may be loosed
from all the sins which he hath committed and that he may look upon the
divine countenances.


_He saith_: Hail to thee, mighty god, lord of Righteousness!

I am come to thee, oh my Lord: I have brought myself that I may look
upon thy glory. I know thee, and I know the name of the Forty-two gods
who make their appearance with thee in the Hall of Righteousness;
devouring those who harbour mischief, and swallowing their blood, upon
the Day of the searching examination(1.) in presence of Unneferu.

Verily, ‘Thou of the Pair of Eyes,(2.) Lord of Righteousness’ is thy
name.

Here am I; I am come to thee; I bring to thee Right and have put a stop
to Wrong.

I am not a doer of wrong to men.

I am not one who slayeth his kindred.(3.)

I am not one who telleth lies instead of truth.(4.)

I am not conscious of treason.

I am not a doer of mischief.

I do not exact as the firstfruits of each day more work than should be
done for me.(5.)

My name cometh not to the Bark of the god who is at the Helm.

I am not a transgressor against the god.

I am not a tale-bearer.

I am not a detractor.

I am not a doer of that which the gods abhor.

I hurt no servant with his master.

I cause no famine.

I cause not weeping.

I am not a murderer.

I give not orders for murder.

I cause not suffering to men.

I reduce not the offerings in the temples.

I lessen not the cakes of the gods.

I rob not the dead of their funereal food.

I am not an adulterer.

I am undefiled in the Sanctuary of the god of my domain.

I neither increase nor diminish the measures of grain.

I am not one who shorteneth the palm’s length.(6.)

I am not one who cutteth short the field’s measure.(7.)

I put not pressure upon the beam(8.) of the balance.

I tamper not with the tongue of the balance.

I snatch not the milk from the mouth of infants.

I drive not the cattle from their pastures.

I net not the birds of the manors of the gods.(9.)

I catch not the fish of their ponds.(10.)

I stop not the water at its appointed time.

I divide not an arm of the water in its course.

I extinguish not the lamp during its appointed time.

I do not defraud the Divine Circle of their sacrificial joints.

I drive not away the cattle of the sacred estate.

I stop not a god when he cometh forth.

I am pure, I am pure, I am pure, I am pure.

My purity is that of the Great Bennu in Sutenhunen, for I am the Nose of
the Lord of Air, who giveth life to all mortals; on the day when the Eye
is full in Annu, on the last day of Mechir; in presence of the Lord of
this land.

And I am one who see the fulness of the Eye in Annu, let no harm come to
me in this land, in the Hall of Righteousness; because I know the names
of those gods who make their appearance in it.


                                PART II.

1. Oh thou of long strides, who makest thine appearance in Annu; I am
not a doer of wrong.

2. Oh thou who holdest the fire, and makest thine appearance in
Cher-āba; I am not a man of violence.

3. Oh thou of the Nose,(11.) who makest thine appearance at Chemunnu; I
am not evil minded.

4. Oh Eater of the Shadow,(12.) who makest thine appearance at
Elephantine; I am not rapacious.

5. Oh thou Facing-backward god, who makest thine appearance at Re-Stau;
I am not a slayer of men.

6. Oh thou of Lion form,(13.) who makest thine appearance in Heaven; I
am not fraudulent in measures of grain.

7. Oh thou whose eyes [pierce] like swords, who makest thine appearance
in Sechem; I commit no fraud.

8. Oh thou of fiery face, whose motion is backwards; I am not a robber
of sacred property.

9. Oh Breaker of bones, who makest thine appearance in Sutenhunen, I am
not a teller of lies.

10. Oh thou who orderest the flame, who makest thine appearance in
Memphis; I am not a robber of food.

11. Oh thou of the Two Caverns, who makest thine appearance in Amenta; I
am not sluggish.(14.)

12. Oh thou of the Bright Teeth,(15.) who makest thine appearance in the
Unseen Land; I am not a transgressor.

13. Oh Eater of Blood, who makest thine appearance at the Block; I have
not slaughtered the sacred animals.

14. Oh Eater of Livers, who makest thine appearance at Mâbit; I deal not
fraudulently.

15. Oh Lord of Righteousness, who makest thine appearance in the place
of Righteousness; I am not a land-grabber.

16. Oh thou who turnest backwards, who makest thine appearance in
Bubastis; I am not an eaves-dropper.

17. Oh Âati,(16.) who makest thine appearance at Annu; I am not one of
prating tongue.

18. Oh Tutu,(17.) who makest thine appearance in Ati; I trouble
myself(18.) only with my own affairs.

19. Oh Uammetu, who makest thine appearance at the Block; I commit not
adultery with another’s wife.

20. Oh Maa-antu-f, who makest thine appearance in Pa-Amsu, I am not
unchaste with any one.

21. Oh thou who art above Princes, and who makest thine appearance in
Amu;(19.) I do not cause terrors.

22. Oh Chemiu,(20.) who makest thine appearance in Kauu; I am not a
transgressor.

23. Oh thou who raisest thy voice,(21.) and makest thine appearance in
Urit; I am not hot of speech.

24. Oh divine Babe, who makest thy appearance in Annu; I lend not a deaf
ear to the words of Righteousness.

25. Oh high-voiced one, who makest thy appearance in Unsit; I am not
boisterous in behaviour.

26. Oh Basit, who makest thine appearance at the Shetait; I am not the
cause of weeping to any.

27. Oh thou whose face is behind thee, and who makest thine appearance
at thy cavern; I am not given to unnatural lust.

28. Oh thou, hot of foot,(22.) who makest thy appearance at even; I
indulge not in anger.

29. Oh Kenemtu, who makest thine appearance in Kenemit; I am not given
to cursing.

30. Oh thou who carriest thine own offering, and makest thine appearance
in Syut; I am not of aggressive hand.

31. Oh thou who hast different faces, and makest thine appearance in
Net’efit; I am not one of inconstant mind.(23.)

32. Oh Busy one, who makest thine appearance at Utenit; I do not steal
the skins of the sacred animals.(24.)

33. Oh thou Horned one, who makest thine appearance at Sais I am not
noisy(25.) in my speech.

34. Oh Nefertmu, who makest thine appearance in Memphis; I am neither a
liar nor a doer of mischief.

35. Oh Tem-sepu, who makest thine appearance in Tattu; I am not one who
curseth the king.

36. Oh thou who doest according to thine own will, and makest thine
appearance in Tebuu; I put no check upon the water in its flow.

37. Oh Striker,(26.) who makest thine appearance in Heaven; I am not one
of loud voice.

38. Oh thou who makest mortals to flourish, and who makest thine
appearance at Sais; I curse not a god.

39. Oh thou of beautiful shoulder, who makest thine appearance at
...(27.); I am not swollen with pride.

40. Oh Neheb-kau, who makest thy appearance at thy cavern; I have no
unjust preferences.(28.)

41. Oh thou of raised head,(29.) who makest thine appearance at thy
cavern; I have no strong desire except for my own property.

42. Oh thou who liftest an arm,(30.) and who makest thine appearance in
the Netherworld, I do not that which offendeth the god of my domain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XXXVII#.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXXV.
  =Tombeau de Seti I^{er}= (Ann. du Musée Guimet, Vol. IX).
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------


                               PART III.

[Said upon approaching to the gods who are in the Tuat.(31.)]

Hail ye gods, I know you and I know your names; let me not be stricken
down by your blows: report not the evil which is in me to the god whom
ye follow. Let not reverse(32.) of mine come to pass through you.

Let not evil things be said against me in presence of the Inviolate One;
because I have done the right in Tamerit.

I revile not the god: let not reverse of mine come to pass through the
King who resideth within His own Day.(33.)

Hail ye gods who are in the Hall of Righteousness, who have nothing
wrong about you; who subsist upon Righteousness in Annu, and who sate
themselves with cares,(34.) in presence of the god who resideth within
his own Orb: deliver me from Babai who feedeth upon the livers of
princes on the Day of the Great Reckoning.

Behold me: I am come to you, void of wrong, without fraud, a harmless
one: let me not be declared guilty; let not the issue be against me.

I subsist upon Righteousness: I sate myself with uprightness of heart: I
have done that which man prescribeth and that which pleaseth the gods.

I have propitiated the god with that which he loveth. I have given bread
to the hungry, water to the thirsty, clothes to the naked, a boat to the
shipwrecked. I have made oblations to the gods and funeral offerings to
the departed: deliver me therefore: protect me therefore: and report not
against me in presence of the great god.

I am one whose mouth is pure, and whose hands are pure, to whom there is
said “Come, come in peace,” by those who look upon him.

For I have listened to the words which were spoken by the Ass and the
Cat in the house of Hept-ro.(35.)

And I have undergone the inspection of the god Whose face is behind him,
who awardeth my verdict(36.), so that I may behold what the Persea tree
covereth(37.) in Restau.

I am one who glorifieth the gods and who knoweth the things which
concern them.

I am come and am awaiting that inquisition be made of Rightfulness and
that the Balance be set upon its stand within the bower of
amaranth.(38.)

O thou who art exalted upon thy pedestal and who callest thy name, Lord
of Air: deliver me from those messengers of thine who inflict
disasters(39.) and bring about mishaps. No covering have they upon their
faces.

For I have done the Righteousness of a Lord of Righteousness.

I have made myself pure: my front parts are washed, my back parts are
pure, and my inwards steeped in the Tank of Righteousness. There is not
a limb in me which is void of Righteousness.

I purify me in the Southern Tank, and I rest me at the northern lake, in
the Garden of Grasshoppers.(40.)

The Boatmen of Rā purify them there at this hour of the night or
day(41.) and the hearts of the gods are appeased(42.) when I pass
through it by night or by day.

Let him come(43.): that is what they say to me.

Who, pray, art thou? that is what they say to me.

What, pray, is thy name? that is what they say to me.

“He who groweth under the Grass(44.) and who dwelleth in the Olive tree”
is my name.

Pass on, then: that is what they say to me.

I pass on to a place north of the Olive.

What, prithee, didst thou see there?

A thigh(45.) and a leg.

And what, prithee, said they to thee?

That I shall see(46.) the greetings in the lands there of the Fenchu.

What, prithee, did they give to thee?

A flame of fire and a pillar of crystal.

And what, prithee, didst thou to them?

I buried them on the bank of the Lake of Māāit as Provision of the
Evening.

What, prithee, didst thou find there on the bank of the Lake of Māāit?

A sceptre of flint: ‘Giver of Breath’ is its name.

And what didst thou to the flame of fire and to the pillar of crystal
after thou hadst buried them?

I cried out after them and drew them forth: and I extinguished the fire,
and I broke the pillar, and I made a Tank.

Thou mayest now enter through the door of the hall of Righteousness, for
thou knowest us.

I allow thee not to pass by me, saith the Leaf(47.) of the Door, unless
thou tell my name:

“The Pointer of Truth”(48.) is thy name.

I allow thee not to pass by me, saith the right side of the Door, unless
thou tell my name.

“The Scale-pan(49.) of one who lifteth up Right” is thy name.

I allow thee not to pass by me, saith the left side post of the Door,
unless thou tell my name:

“The Scale-pan of Wine” is thy name.

I allow thee not to pass over me, saith the Threshold of the Door,
unless thou tell my name:

“Ox of Seb” is thy name.

I open not to thee, saith the Lock of the Door, unless thou tell my
name:

Bone of An-maut-ef is thy name.

I open not to thee, saith the Latch, unless thou tell my name:

“The Eye of Sebak, Lord of Bachau,” is thy name.

I open not to thee, and I allow thee not to pass by me, saith the Keeper
of the Door, unless thou tell my name:

“The Knee of Shu, which he hath lent for the support of Osiris,” is thy
name.

We allow thee not to pass by us, say the Lintels of the Door, unless
thou tell our names:

“The dragon brood(50.) of Renenut” is your name.

Thou knowest us: pass therefore by us.


I allow thee not to pass over me, saith the Floor of the Hall, for the
reason that I am noiseless and clean, and because we know not the names
of thy two feet, wherewith thou wouldst walk upon us. Tell me, then,
their names.

“He who goeth before Amsu” is the name of my right foot: and “The
Truncheon of Hathor”(51.) is the name of my left foot.

Thou mayest walk over us: for thou knowest us.


I do not announce thee, saith the Doorkeeper, unless thou tell my name:

“He who knoweth the heart and exploreth the person”(52.) is thy name.

Then I will announce thee.

But who is that god who abideth in his own hour? Name him.

He who provideth for(53.) the Two Worlds.

Who, pray, is it? It is Thoth.

Come hither, saith Thoth, wherefore hast thou come?

I am come, and wait to be announced.

And what manner of man, prithee, art thou?

I have cleansed myself from all the sins and faults of those who abide
in their own day; for I am no longer among them.

Then I shall announce thee.

But who is he whose roof is of fire, and whose walls are living Uræi,
and the floor of whose house is of running water? Who is it?

It is Osiris.

Proceed then: for behold, thou art announced.

Thy bread is from the Eye, thy beer is from the Eye, and the funeral
meals offered upon earth will come forth to thee from the Eye(54.). So
is it decreed for me.

_This chapter is said by the person, when purified and clad in raiment;
shod with white sandals; anointed from vases of ānta; and presenting
oblations of beeves, birds, incense, bread, beer and vegetables._

_And thou shalt make a picture, drawn upon a clean brick of clay,
extracted from a field in which no swine hath trod._

_And if this chapter be written upon it--the man will prosper and his
children will prosper: he will rise in the affection of the king and his
court: there will be given to him the shesit cake, the measure of drink,
the persen cake and the meat offering upon the altar table of the great
god; and he shall not be cut off at any gate of Amenta, but he shall be
conveyed along with the Kings of North and South, and make his
appearance as a follower of Osiris: undeviatingly and for times
infinite._

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XXXVIII.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

                        CHAPTER CXXV. (Note 2.)

[Illustration: Papyrus, British Museum, No. 9900.]

[Illustration: Mummy Case, Leyden Museum.]]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XXXIX.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration: Papyrus, Leyden Museum.]

[Illustration: LEPSIUS, Todtenbuch.]

[Illustration: Papyrus, British Museum, 9964.]

[Illustration: Mummy Case, Leyden Museum.]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER CXXV.

                                 NOTES.

For the significance of this most important chapter with reference to
the religion and ethics of ancient Egypt I must refer to the
Introduction. The notes in this place must be confined to the text and
its elucidation.

No copy of the chapter is known of more ancient date than the eighteenth
dynasty, but the oldest papyri contain the three parts of which the
chapter consists. That the chapter is of much earlier date than the
eighteenth dynasty is quite certain from the nature of the corruptions
which had already made their appearance in the earliest copies which
have come down to us. But the three parts are not necessarily of the
same antiquity. The second part seems to have grown out of the first and
to have been suggested by the mention of the “Forty-two” gods and the
“negative confession,” as it is called, of certain sins. It is a
tabulated form in which the gods are named and a sin is mentioned in
connection with each god. The number of sins in this form is therefore
forty-two; a higher number than in Part I.

The two catalogues agree to a certain extent, but they also disagree,
and the second is evidently the result of a different process of thought
than that which gave birth to the first. The author of Part I is not the
author of Part II, unless perhaps at a different and later period. Nor
is there any indication in Part I of the extraordinary examination to
which the deceased person is subjected in Part III. This in itself would
not be a serious objection, but the matter becomes more complicated if
we remember that the picture of the Psychostasia has the right to be
considered as a part of the chapter. The texts which are written upon it
differ, indeed, according to the taste of the artist, and can therefore
claim no canonical authority. But the question as to the order of
succession in the trials, or the precise moment at which the deceased
person is finally freed from all anxiety as to his fate, cannot be
satisfactorily solved on the supposition that all these documents form
parts of a consistent whole. It seems much more natural to consider them
as really independent compositions brought together in consequence of
their subject matter. The artists of the Ramseside period (in the papyri
of Hunefer and Ani) add another scene[111] in which the deceased is
judged not by the forty-two assessors of Osiris but by a smaller company
of gods (twelve or fourteen), sitting on thrones and bearing the names
of well known divinities.

The essential notion was that of a trial before Osiris, in which the
man’s conduct or conscience was weighed in the Balance. This trial is
referred to in various chapters of the Book of the Dead and in other
texts which prove that, with reference to the details, free scope was
allowed to the imagination of the scribes or artists.

The number of the Forty-two assessors might be thought connected with
that of the Nomes of Egypt. But this number is only certain for the
later periods of Egyptian history, and is not true for earlier times.
Moreover the localities in which the gods are said to make their
appearances do not correspond to the nomes, or places within them. Some
of the localities occur more than once, and some of them, if not all,
are localities not upon earth. Heaven occurs twice, the eleventh god
makes his appearance at Amenta and the forty-second in the Netherworld.
But the names which have a more earthly sound may have a mystical
meaning. The first god makes his appearance in Annu, so does the
seventeenth and so does the twenty-fourth. But does this mean Heliopolis
of Egypt? On referring to an important text in Mariette’s _Monuments
Divers_, pl. 46, it will be seen that Annu is the Eastern _Solar
Mountain_ ⁂⁂⁂, where the sun rises, and where he is saluted by
the Powers of the East. There cannot be a more striking illustration of
“the Divine Babe who maketh his appearance in Annu” (the twenty-fourth
Assessor), than the _picture_ I refer to.[112]

And Chemunnu, ⁂⁂⁂⁂, is surely not the Hermopolis of
Egypt, but the place _of the Eight gods_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂,
four to the Left and four to the Right of the rising sun, who hail
his coming and help him to rise; where Shu, according to the MSS. of
the 17th Chapter, raises up the Sky, and where “the children of
Failure,” (that is, shades of darkness) are exterminated. It is not
simply of Hermopolis nor yet of Lake Moeris that one may say
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂
‘it is the place of the Eight deities where Rā riseth’ (_Zeitschr._,
1872, p. 8).

The same considerations apply to such names as those of Sutenhunen and
Tattu.

The presence of the divine “Babe,” of the god “of long strides” (Rā), of
the god “of Lion form,” of the goddess Bast, of Nefer-tmu, of the
“Striker” (_Ahi_, a name of Horus), and of Nehebkau, not to mention
others, among the Assessors, would of itself be sufficient to convince
us that, in spite of the strange and terrific names of some of these
personages, they are not to be looked upon as fiends, like Malacoda,
Scarmiglione, and the rest of the demon crew in the Inferno of Dante.
They are not evil spirits, but gods, all of them, “subsisting on
righteousness;” there is “nothing _wrong_ about them.”[113] They are the
gods who accompany Osiris, and, according to Egyptian theology, are his
Names, his Limbs, his Body. If the names of some of them appear harsh or
cruel, it is because strict Justice is inexorable, and Mercy is a
quality never thought of in Egyptian theology.

The exact notion of Maāt in Egyptian texts is discussed in another part
of the present work. In this chapter I have translated it
_Righteousness_, because the question here is about _moral conduct_: and
conformity to the strict Rule of Right towards one’s fellow men, one’s
own self and the heavenly powers is what is meant by Righteousness. And
here it is opposed to moral transgression or sin, not to physical evil,
which itself is a very frequent result from the operation of the
inexorable Maāt.

But in the expression, “Hall of Righteousness,” the word in Egyptian is
used in the dual number: hence the erroneous or inadequate translations,
“the Two Truths,” or “Double Justice,” and the guesses which have been
made as to their meaning.

A very important determinative of the Egyptian word is found not only in
the papyri but in the very earliest mention yet known of the Hall. The
great inscription of the tomb of Peher at El Kab, calls it the
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. The repetition of the sign ⁂ indicates a
locality in which the Sun-god is _present_, as in the cases of ⁂,
⁂, ⁂⁂ and many others. Space is divided into two parts; one
on the Southern and one on the Northern side of the god as he proceeds
on his course. And when we have for determinatives two Uræi ⁂⁂, or
two ostrich Feathers ⁂⁂, we have to understand two goddesses Maāt,
one to the Left and one to the Right side of Osiris.

These goddesses are Isis and Nephthys, who play very conspicuous parts
in a symbolism discussed in note 2 of the present chapter.

It would be well if evidence could be brought with equal facility to
bear upon all the difficulties with which the chapter abounds. But
though a very lively interest was attracted to it ever since Champollion
quoted extracts from it in his Grammar, the difficulties with which he
did not attempt to cope have only increased with our knowledge of the
language and its scientific treatment. The text is extremely doubtful in
many important parts, the forty-two sins are not the same in all the
manuscripts, and they are not assigned to the jurisdiction of the same
gods. So important a papyrus as that of Sutimes omits some sins of which
an Egyptian would certainly be expected to give an account. The same
word is made to appear with different meanings in the same passage of
the papyri when they are compared together. And there are not a few
important words of which the meaning was first only guessed at by the
first translators, but has been retained without sufficient warrant by
their successors. The present translation is presented under the full
consciousness of all its imperfections, and of the difficulties which
have yet to be overcome before a version can be called satisfactory.

A very admirable contribution towards our acquaintance with the first
part of the chapter was made as far back as 1866 by Dr. Pleyte in his
_Etudes Egyptologiques_. Since then other versions have appeared by MM.
Devéria, Lefébure and Pierret.

The Demotic text of the chapter, first published by Brugsch, and now
more recently, with a complete translation, by M. Revillout, is in
itself most interesting, but written, as it is, in the days of imperial
Rome, cannot always be appealed to as to an authoritative exposition of
the ancient text.

1. _The Day of searching examination_ or reckoning. The word
⁂⁂⁂ has to be compared with the Coptic ⲕⲱϯ in the sense of
_search_, _enquiry_, ζητεῖν, ζήτησις. This sense is derived from
⁂⁂ _a circle_ (⁂⁂⁂ _sail round_) and the notion of
going completely round a thing and approaching it from all sides.

2. _Thou_ [literally _he_] of _the Pair of Eyes_
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.[114] This title of
Osiris is made clear by the 37th chapter, which begins with
an invocation to the _Sister Pair of Goddesses, Merta_
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, _Merta_ signifying _Two
Eyes_, and the divine Sister pair being Isis and Nephthys.

In vignettes of the chapter (see, _e.g._, Pl. XXXIII and XXXIV, figs. 14
and 16 for instances) the two goddesses appear in human form with their
brother Osiris within the naos where the judgment is delivered. It is
not so easy to recognise them under the form ⁂⁂ which they have
in the vignette of _Pb._ (see Pl. XXXI), or in the picture which is
found in many papyri (_e.g._, those of Nebseni, Hunefer, Ani and the
Turin _Todtenbuch_), wherein the cornice or top row of the decoration
surmounting the forty-two judges has for central figure a man (Osiris)
either supporting the Two Eyes or extending his hands above them (see
Pl. XXXIV, fig. 14).

We have here a symbolism of such extreme importance as to justify a
short excursus on the subject.

The Two Eyes ⁂⁂ are a most frequent symbol on all funereal
monuments; on the most ancient coffins, such as those of Apaānchu,
Antuf, Taka (_Denkm._, II, 98, 146, 147), Mentuhotep (_Aelteste Texte_,
pl. 9 and 25), Sebak-āa (Gio. d’Athanasi, pl. 3) and Amamu, as on mummy
cases generally, and on funereal tablets. Between the Eyes on many
tablets we frequently find the sign ⁂, and this is often followed by
the sign of Water ⁂ or the Vase ⁂, and very frequently by both.
Very often we have two signs ⁂, one by each Eye, and not less
frequently a pair of jackals, ⁂ or ⁂ facing each other. No two
tablets are exactly alike, but the meaning is always the same.

Nor is the meaning changed when the tablet is headed by the Winged Disk
⁂ or ⁂ even though the Eyes are not seen. Their place is
supplied by two Uræi, sometimes crowned with the ⁂ and the ⁂,
insignia of Southern and Northern sovereignty.

On a fine tablet of the twelfth dynasty (_Denkm._, II, 136_b_), the sign
⁂ is attached to each Uræus, and this device is repeated on
innumerable monuments.

According to another device the Two Eyes are represented within the
Winged Disk (see _e.g._, Leemans, _Mon._, III, _M._, Pl. XVI).

“He of the Pair of Eyes” is always Osiris. But Osiris is a god “of many
names,” as the Pyramid Texts show no less than the Book of the Dead,
where in the seventeenth chapter he is identified with Tmu, Rā, the
Bennu, Amsu and Horus, not to mention others, and where in the Scholia
the Two Feathers, the Two Uræi, the Two Eyes and the Two Kites[115] are
identified with the Sister pair Isis and Nephthys. And wherever these
symbols occur in _pairs_ Isis and Nephthys are meant, one for the right
or northern side and the other for the left or southern. The same idea
is conveyed under such forms as ⁂, ⁂, or ⁂, and many others.
Dr. Birch long ago (_Zeitschr._, 1877, p. 33) mentioned ⁂⁂⁂
as representing Osiris between his two sisters. Osiris is often
represented as a living ⁂, with eyes.

The royal crowns and their decorations, such as ⁂, ⁂, ⁂,
⁂, and ⁂, abound in this symbolism.

The ancient coffin of Sebakāa at Berlin (_Aelteste Texte_, pl. 29), in
the phrase ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, recognizes Isis as one of
the Two Eyes. Down to the latest periods the Sisters were known as
⁂⁂⁂, _Eye of the Southern_ or Left _side_ (Isis), and
⁂⁂⁂, _Eye of the Northern_ or Right _side_ (Nephthys). On
countless coffins and sarcophagi these goddesses are represented on
opposite sides, in kneeling attitude, holding the ⁂ in their hands,
like the equivalent Vultures of the North and South, with their claws,
and the Uræi on their bodies.

The meaning of the sign ⁂ is well known. It is a _ring_, and is
applied to the circuit of the heavens made by the sun and other heavenly
bodies. It is also applied to the yearly recurring flow of the Nile. It
has numerically the signification of 10,000,000 or an indefinitely large
number. As attached, ⁂, to the sign of years ⁂,⁂ it means
_Eternity_.

It is therefore an appropriate emblem of Osiris, the Lord of Years,
⁂⁂⁂⁂, _annosus_, ⁂⁂⁂ the _King of Eternity_.

The sign of _Water_ ⁂, and the _Vase_ ⁂, are also emblems of
Osiris, one of whose names is _Water of Renewal_. A chapter of the
Pyramid Texts, Teta, 176, Pepi I, 518, which begins by saying that Seb
has given to the departed (identified with Osiris) the Two Eyes of _that
Great One_,[116] and has done that through Horus who recognizes his
father, proceeds after this to say: “He renews thee in thy name of
⁂⁂⁂⁂, Water of Renewal.”

I cannot say if the _Vase_ ⁂ is a mere appendage to the _Water_, but
if it is not it most probably was meant to contain the ⁂, the divine
and life-giving _Sap_ flowing from Osiris, which is mentioned in another
Pyramid Text (Pepi I, 33), also speaking of the _Water of Renewal_, as a
name of Osiris.

The goddesses Isis and Nephthys as mythological figures represent not
merely the Light at Dawn and Sunset, but the Light thrown out right and
left by the Sun in his entire course, whether in the heavens or in the
Netherworld. ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, “he lightens up
the earth with his two eyes,” an expression most frequent in the texts,
is not confined to special moments, though it is said of these
emphatically.

In all that has been said thus far, the Two Eyes have been considered as
acting conjointly and discharging one and the same function. When they
are distinguished one from the other as acting in different ways the
symbolism is altered.

The ancient scholion on the 17th Chapter speaks of the Right Eye of Rā,
and the more recent scholion of the papyri speaks of the Eye as being in
pain and weeping for its sister ⁂⁂⁂. The Egyptian name for
the Eye is here ⁂⁂⁂⁂ _ut’ait_. The frequent expression
⁂⁂ means _full moon_, and is constantly identified with the
fifteenth day of the month ⁂. The moon is in these texts called the
_Left Eye_ ⁂⁂, and Osiris is said to unite with her (or with her
sister) in order to renew her revolution ⁂⁂⁂⁂. And of the
Eye it is said that ‘she renews her revolution on the fifteenth day’
⁂⁂⁂⁂, and the god (Osiris) makes her full of her _glory_
or _splendour_ (⁂⁂⁂⁂) or what she requires, ⁂⁂ =
⁂⁂⁂⁂. This explains the symbol ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ which
is seen on certain tablets.

But what is the meaning of the passage at the end of Part I of this
chapter--“when the Eye is full in Annu, on the last day of Mechir”
⁂⁂⁂⁂, an expression which is repeated in the title of
Chapter 140? The moon, which is always represented as full on the
fifteenth of the month, cannot be full on the thirtieth. It must be the
other Eye, the Sun. Now we know what is meant by the Full Moon, the
Plenilunium, but what is the Full Sun?

M. de Rougé, in his commentary on the 17th Chapter, gave the key to
this, by pointing out that the 30th Mechir was the last day of the sixth
month of the year; that is the 180th day after the first of Thoth, which
is supposed to coincide with the Summer Solstice. It is therefore at the
time of the _Winter_ Solstice that the Eye is said to be full. The
inaccuracy, of course, arises from the length of the Egyptian year. But
there can be no doubt that the time of the Winter Solstice is meant.

In the year 1470 B.C. the Egyptian year began on July 20, and the 30th
Mechir coincided with January 15 of the Julian calendar.

If the Eye (considered as the Sun) is said to be _full_ at the Winter
Solstice, it was most probably spoken of in the same way not only at the
Summer Solstice, but also at the two Equinoxes. And this is the most
probable reason why in the pictures representing the Four Rudders of
Heaven (North, South, East and West) an Eye ⁂ is attached to each
rudder. (See Vignettes of Chapter 148.)

The Two Eyes, considered as Sun and Moon, are attributed not only to Rā
and Osiris, but to gods identified with these. Of the two passages which
have been most frequently quoted, “Thy Right Eye is the Sun
⁂⁂⁂ and thy left is the Moon ⁂⁂,” “His Right Eye is the
Sun and his left is the Moon,” the first is addressed to Ptah (in the
Pap. Berlin, VII, l. 42), and the second, which occurs on the Neapolitan
Stele, is really addressed to Osiris as god of Suten-hunen, under the
form of the Ram-headed deity Her-śefit. Reference is made towards the
end of the inscription to the “divine Eyes which are in Suten-hunen.”

Horus according to the Pyramid Texts has two eyes, a Light one and a
Dark one. But the “Eye of Horus” is most frequently spoken of in the
singular number. It is certainly meant for the Sun, and the name of it
is given to cakes and ale, wine, corn, oil, honey, and all the good
things which come to maturity through the beneficent god: who has in
himself all the attributes of ‘Ceres and Bacchus.’

I must bring this long note to an end with one or two observations.

Many goddesses will be found bearing the title of Eye of Rā. There is
not one of these who is not identified with Isis or Nephthys, who are in
fact one, and personify the Light of the Sun.

Shu and Tefnut, who are brother and sister, play the same parts as the
two goddesses.

There is a picture, which appears in the vignette of Chapter 17 in most
of the papyri of the second and later periods, of two _male_ deities
bearing the Eyes over their heads (see Pl. XXXV). If the beards upon
their chins are not a mistake,[117] copied from one papyrus upon
another, they must represent not Isis and Nephthys but the two Rehu
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ Rā and Thoth, Sun and Moon, instead of the
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

It is important to note that if Sun and Moon are Eyes of Osiris or Rā or
Ptah, the deity is not to be confounded with them: they are but
manifestations of himself.

3. _Kindred_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. The sign of plurality does not
here, any more than in Chapter 1, necessarily imply more than one
person. The crime in question is one to which men are easily tempted in
certain stages of society. Abimelech, in the book of Judges (ix, 5),
“slew his brethren, the sons of Jerubbaal.” Jephthah had to “flee from
the face of his brethren.” Absalom had his brother Amnon assassinated,
and all the king’s sons fled in fear of sharing the same fate. Solomon
put to death his elder brother Adonijah. Athaliah, the queen mother,
“destroyed all the seed royal” of Judah. The annals of eastern[118] and
even western[119] nations are full of such occurrences. But, in
positions less exalted than that of claimants to royalty, ambition or
covetousness are motives to crimes like that of the wicked uncle of ‘the
Babes in the Wood.’[120] The reading ⁂⁂⁂⁂, which has for
determinative the sign ⁂ of _smallness_, seems to indicate that the
victims of the crime are _minors_, perhaps _wards_.

Some of the papyri (even that of Nebseni) have a _calf_, ⁂, as
determinative of the word, and as the ‘slaying of calves’ is not
necessarily a crime, other scribes have added ⁂⁂, ‘sacred,’ and
thus made the sin one of sacrilege.

The same word, like the Greek μόσχος and the Latin _pullus_, might be
applied to the young of all kinds of animals; but the Egyptian scribes
have in such cases a propensity to use a determinative which forces a
wrong sense upon the word.

4. _Instead of truth_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. There are two
ways according to which this expression may be translated, but only one
of them can be the right one. ⁂⁂⁂ is a compound preposition,
_instead of_, _in loco_, _anstatt_, _au lieu de_, بمنزلة. And this is
evidently the right construction. If ⁂ be taken as the simple
preposition governing ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, the meaning will be that
the deceased did not “tell lies _in the cemetery_.” The Pyramid Texts
(Unas, 394) have the expression ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂(_sic_),
“Right instead of Wrong.”

5. This is only an approximate version of a passage, the true text of
which was lost at an early period. M. Maspero (_Origines_, p. 189)
understands it as follows: “Je n’ai jamais imposé du travail à l’homme
libre quelconque, en plus de celui qu’il faisait pour luimême!” The last
words are the translation of ⁂⁂⁂, according to _Td._ (tomb
of Ramses IV) all the other ancient texts having ⁂, ‘_for me_.’ But
the chief difficulties occur at the beginning of the sentence.

6. _Shorten the palm’s length_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. Many papyri
read ⁂, which is a superficial measure, more in place under the next
precept.

7. _The fields’ measure_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

8. _The beam of the balance_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

_The tongue_ [rather _plummet_] _of the balance_,
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

The balance is so frequently represented in false perspective by
Egyptian artists, that Sir J. G. Wilkinson has given an account of it,
which is quite unintelligible to those who have ever so moderate a
knowledge of statics. Mr. Petrie’s description is the true one. “The
beam was suspended by a loop or ring from a bracket projecting from the
stand.... Then below the beam, a long tongue was attached, not above the
beam as with us. To test the level of the beam, a plummet hung down the
tongue, and it was this plummet which was observed to see if the tongue
was vertical and the beam horizontal.”--_A Season in Egypt_, p. 42.

In Pl. XXXVI, a few pictures will be found which give a more correct
notion of the Egyptian balance than some of the absurd representations
which defy a scientific explanation.

It is evident that if the tongue is fastened at a wrong angle, the beam
will not really be horizontal when the tongue is shown by the plummet
line to be vertical. This seems to be the fraud alluded to in the text.

The word ⁂⁂, ⁂⁂, the name given to the plummet,
apparently signifies a cup _full_ of liquid. It is etymologically
identical with ⁂⁂⁂⁂, _a toper_ (ⲑⲁϧⲓ, ϯϩⲉ, _ebrius_,
_ebrietas_), ⁂⁂⁂, ⲧⲓϧⲓ, _a crane_, and ⁂⁂⁂ the
crane-god, Thoth.

The apparatus of which the plummet forms so important a part, whether
for the balance or for building purposes, is called ⁂⁂⁂
(_Denkm._, III, 26), ⁂⁂.

9. _The manors of the gods_, ⁂⁂⁂. I understand ⁂⁂ as
property acquired by royal grant. Aâhmes at El Kab says that he has
_acquired_ (⁂⁂⁂⁂) much land through the royal bounty. The
deceased in the later copies of the Book of the Dead (Ch. 1, 24),
acquires the allotment of land, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, in the
Garden of Aarru, and Ani (Pl. III) acquires “a permanent allotment
(⁂⁂⁂) in the Garden of Hotepit like the followers of Horus.”

10. _Ponds._ The right reading is ⁂⁂⁂, as Birch already noted
in his _Dictionary_, from the excellent papyrus _Ao_ of the XVIIIth
dynasty.

Hieratic papyri also give the determinative ⁂.

The determinative ⁂ which some of the papyri give to the word, and
which is a self-evident blunder, is probably copied either from ⁂,
or from ⁂. The sign ⁂, and a man striking with an instrument,
which also occur, are mere symbols of the operation by which either
_quarries_, or _ponds_, are _cut_.

11. _Thou of the Nose_, or rather _Beak_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂, in
allusion to one of the chief characteristic features of the Ibis god
(πρόσωπον ἐς τὰ μάλιστα ἐπίγρυπον; _Herodotus_, II, 76, in his
description of the bird). Thoth, the god of Chemunnu, is meant by this
appellative.

He is so called, ⁂⁂⁂, on the statue of the King Horus in the
Museum of Turin (l. 8), and ⁂⁂⁂ on the very much more ancient
altar, of the VIth dynasty, belonging to the same museum. The same
appellative[121] is found in the list of gods upon each of the Memphite
cubits described by Lepsius.[122]

12. _Eater of the Shadow._ The Demotic version interprets this of “his
own shadow.” I am rather inclined to interpret it by “the gnomons which
were without shadows at noon,” and the “well of Syene” (Strabo, 817) at
the Summer Solstice; when the Sun was vertical.

13. _Thou of Lion form_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂. The Demotic has “Shu and
Tefnut.” But as there are only forty-two gods in all, we must here think
of a single god with a lion’s head, as in such pictures as _Wilkinson_,
III, Pl. XLIX; _Denkm._, III, 276, and many sarcophagi (_e.g._, Leemans,
_Mon._, III, L, Pl. III).

Even some of the Theban papyri have two divinities by way of
determinatives to the group.

14. _Sluggish_, ⁂⁂⁂; ⁂⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂⁂,
_sluggishness_. Coptic ϭⲛⲁⲩ. See my note (_Proc. Soc. Bib. Arch._, XI,
p. 76) on the Inscription of Kum el Ahmar.

There are however other readings; none of them apparently of any value.

15. _Thou of the Bright Teeth_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. The
Demotic equivalent is, “who openeth his teeth,” and so exhibits their
brightness.

16. _Âati_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, a name about which the copyists have
bungled. It is one of the names of Râ in the Solar Litany, where it
appears (l. 23) as ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, or ⁂⁂. Whether
applied to the Sun, to the Fish of the name, or to a Ship, the name
means _Cutter_, ‘that which cleaves’ its way.

17. _Ṭuṭu_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, with many variants, showing that the
scribes did not understand the sense of the syllable ⁂⁂, some of
them adding the bird of evil ⁂, others the ⁂ determinative of
_mountain_. The name on the Sarcophagus of Seti (Bon. II, A. 30) has a
snake for determinative, and some papyri call him _Ṭuṭu_. The god may be
recognised in later texts. In the Calendar of Esneh there is a feast on
the 14th day of Thoth, in honour of ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, Tutu, ‘the
son of Neith,’ and the text gives the important determinative ⁂, of a
_serpent_, _worm_, or _slug_. I feel sure, therefore, that we should in
the text read the name Tutu, and consider ⁂ as a determinative.[123]
The symbolism would then be identical with that in Pl. XXIII,
illustrative of Chapter 87. The Sun-god there rises up like a worm out
of the Lotus of Dawn, whereas in another picture a slug (⁂) is seen
moving upon the flower.

⁂⁂, _Ati_, where the god makes his appearance, is the name of the
ninth Nome of Lower Egypt.

18. _I trouble myself only with my own affairs._ I understand this of
the virtue spoken of by Cicero (_de Officiis_, I, 34), “nihil praeter
suum negotium agere, nihil de alieno anquirere, minimeque esse in aliena
republica curiosum.” It is the same to which Plato refers in the
_Timaeus_, 72 A; εὖ καὶ πάλαι λέγεται τὸ πράττειν καὶ γνῶναι τὰ τε
ἑαυτοῦ καὶ ἑαυτὸν σώφρονι μόνῳ προσήκειν, not in the sense of a selfish
indifference to a neighbour’s welfare or the public good, but in
opposition to the ways of the busybodies, who tattle and “speak things
which they ought not” (1 Tim., v, 13).

The Egyptian ⁂⁂⁂ is a rare word. Brugsch’s etymology of it is
an impossible one, and his identification of it with ϣⲱⲥⲙ is not less
unfortunate.

19. _Amu_, or _Amit_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂.
This seems to be the favourite reading. It means the _town of Palm_.
But, as the name was written ideographically, it appears in some copies
as the town of other trees, such as _Nehait_, or _Nārit_.

Amu was a place in the north of Egypt, which Brugsch thinks he has
identified with a town called Apis (the site of which is itself
doubtful).

The most interesting thing known about Amu (Dümichen, _Rec. de M._, IV,
Pl. XV, 90 _a_), is that in the rites performed on the 16 Choiak, Horus
is represented as raising up the body of Osiris out of the water in the
form of a crocodile; and that Osiris was known under the name of
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, _The Crocodile, Lord of Amu_.

The 142nd chapter of the Book of the Dead, which gives a list of the
names of Osiris, has (l. 17) that of ⁂⁂, ‘Osiris of Crocodile
form,’ or ‘with Crocodile head.’[124] The variants of this group,
however, show the reading ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, ‘king,’ or
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, ‘of kingly form.’ There is but little doubt that
(as M. Naville says, _Zeitschr._, 1882, p. 190) ⁂⁂⁂⁂ on the
Turin tablet published by Professor Piehl, means ‘King of the gods,’ and
that Ptahhotep in the Prisse papyrus (IV, 1) addresses not Osiris, but
King Assa as ‘my Lord the King,’ Goodwin had already asserted this
meaning in his “_Story of Saneha_,” and in the _Zeitschr._, 1874, p. 38.

The orthography of the crocodile name here played upon is remarkably
vague, ⁂⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂, and ⁂⁂⁂ (_rapax_,
Louvre, C, 26). It is this last form which enables us to see the
paranomasia in ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, _rapax sicut Raptor_
(_crocodilus_) of the Prisse papyrus (VII, 6), and brings the word into
connection with _ȧta_, or _ȧti_, ‘he who is seized’ of the Sovereignty
(see _supra_, Ch. 40, note 10).

20. _Chemiu_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, ‘one who overthrows.’ His
appearance is made at _Kauu_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂, the Canobic entrance
to the Nile, which the Libyan invaders had taken possession of in the
time of Rameses III (Great _Harris Pap._, 77, 2).

The _transgression_ here disavowed is understood by some of the scribes
as a violation of ritual precepts, such as those regarding sacred
seasons.

21. _Who raisest thy voice_ ... _words of Righteousness_,
⁂⁂⁂⁂ is an attribute assigned to Isis in the Hymn to Osiris
(line 14) on the Stele of Amenemhait in the Bibliothèque Nationale; and
it is there further defined through the addition of the words
⁂⁂⁂⁂, ‘with _clearness_ of utterance’ (_cf._ Ch. 1, note
2). One of the chief names of Isis is ⁂⁂⁂⁂ ‘Mighty in
Words of Power.’ She is also described in the Hymn as ‘Most potent of
tongue (⁂⁂⁂⁂) and unfailing of speech.’[125]

Her name _Urit ḥekait_ may have suggested the name _Urit_ as the place
of her manifestation. But we do not know if _Urit_ is to be taken as the
name of a town or if some papyri are correct in reading ⁂⁂⁂,
which may mean _tribunal_.

There were in ancient Egypt _six_ great courts of justice,
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

A High Priest of Ptah of Memphis, named Ptahmes, in the early part
of the eighteenth dynasty, who was President of these six
Courts,[126] has left a very remarkable attestation relative to
the 24th Precept, on a beautiful scribe’s palette in basalt
(Louvre, _Inv._, 3026). The inscription, after saying that the
whole country was subject to the jurisdiction of Ptahmes, proceeds
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. “He
turned not a deaf ear to the truth, through the terrors of his
Eye;” that is, “the terrors of his Eye” were not used for the
perversion of Justice. But what is meant by his “Eye”? M. Pierret
(in his _Inscr. inédites du Louvre_, pt. 1, p. 96) suggested the
‘Eye of Horus.’ I think it has reference to the position of
Ptahmes as ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. He was ‘the King’s Eye,’
ὁ βασιλέως ὀφθαλμός,[127] and had in consequence, an unlimited
power of defeating justice had he been so inclined.

It is only by a blunder[128] that the papyrus of Ani makes
⁂⁂⁂⁂ (the nineteenth Nome of Upper Egypt) the scene of
the divine Babe’s manifestation, which is unquestionably Heliopolis.
The name of the Nome has numerous variants, but they always consist of
two signs, _a crooked staff_ (⁂, ⁂, ⁂, ⁂) either double
or with _a twisted cord_ (⁂, ⁂, ⁂, ⁂), and the final
sound of the name (when expressed) is in ⁂, ⁂. The key to the
phonetic reading of the name of the Heliopolitan Nome is to be found
in the inscription at Edfu (J. de Rougé, _Edfou_, pl. 46);
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. Here
the _crook_ of the name is identified with the _crook_ and _flail_
⁂⁂⁂⁂ _ams_, ⁂⁂⁂ _ȧms_, ⁂⁂⁂ or
⁂⁂⁂ _emsit_ of Osiris, who is called in the Book of the
Dead (_Todt._, 142, 9) ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, _the August
Dismembered[129] one of the Powers of Annu_. And this is how, in the
important papyrus _Pc_, we find ⁂⁂⁂ in Ch. 17 as the
equivalent of ⁂⁂⁂⁂, a few words after, in the same
papyrus. Both groups are to be read _ȧmsu_; which means _furnished
with the crook_ (_or sceptre_) _and flail_, ⁂⁂ or ⁂.[130]

22. _Hot of foot_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

The Coptic ⲟⲩⲉⲙϩⲏⲧ, _poenitentiam agere_, would be the natural
representative of ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, but the meanings of the terms
cannot be the same. The latter is expressive of a passion, the
indulgence in which may be laudable in the gods and yet blameworthy in
men. For the divine wrath is necessarily just; whereas human anger, even
when it seems to listen to reason, listens, as the philosopher says, but
imperfectly.[131]

The 29th god, _Kenemta_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, has also for
determinative the sign ⁂ of a cynocephalus. This is explained by his
identity with the constellation which occupies the whole month of Thoth
in the list of the Decans. But though the name means ‘_in Ape form_,’
the word ⁂⁂⁂ in the Pyramid Texts (Pepi i, 408, and Merira
579) is used in the sense of ‘vested,’ ‘clad,’ perhaps simply ‘covered.’

Brugsch has identified the locality _Kenemit_ with the Great Oasis at
Khargeh. It may be asked if the Oasis bore this name at the time when
this chapter was composed. The determinative ⁂ proves nothing
beyond the actual sense of the word, but it suggests that the _Dark_ may
be a sufficient translation. From the etymology I should like to
assimilate it to the ποικιλείμων νὺξ of the Prometheus Vinctus, or to
the ‘furvo circumdata peplo’ of the Latin poet.

23. _Of inconstant mind_, ⁂⁂⁂.

24. Another intelligible reading of the precept is, “I rob not the dead
of their wrappings”; but the text is so corrupt that none of the
readings are of any value.

The god is called ⁂⁂⁂⁂ or ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, both of
which words I understand in the sense of _busy-minded_, _planning_,
_devising_, _crafty_, _wise_.

The appellative _Horned one_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, of the next
precept, is the exact equivalent of the Hebrew בַּעַל קַרְנַיִס, and is
the attribute of Osiris (_Todt._, 144, 4), especially in the character
of ⁂⁂⁂; under which name he was worshipped at Sutenhunen.

25. _Noisy in speech_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

26. _Striker_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂. A name of Horus, on which see ch. 103,
note.

27. There is no locality about which there is any agreement between the
older papyri, and many of them omit the mention of a locality; later
authorities, like the Turin text, read ⁂⁂ _Annu_.

28. _No unjust preferences_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂. There is no virtue more
frequently extolled on the funereal monuments than the absence of
favouritism. Great personages in their epitaphs are strong in their
declarations that they made no distinction between great and small, rich
or poor, wise or simple. The declaration of Ameni (_Denkm._, ii, 122),
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, is a type of many
others.

29. Of _raised head_, ⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂, or (B.M. 9971)
⁂⁂⁂. This, like the last two, is a name of the Nile god, who
is one of the manifestations of Osiris.

30. _Who liftest an arm_, ⁂⁂, not ‘_amener_ son bras.’ ⁂, like
the Greek φέρειν, means _bear_ in the sense of _holding up_,
_supporting_. When it signifies _bring_ the collateral notion of
_motion_ is imported from the context. The god Shu, who is called
⁂⁂, _holds up_, _supports_, _the sky_, but does not _bring_ it.
The god _who holds up his arm_, is of course the ithyphallic Amon[132]
⁂, who in Ch. 17 is identified not only with Horus but with Osiris.

31. This introduction to Part III of this chapter occurs only in the
Papyrus of Nebkat (_Pe_). Another ancient manuscript (_Pb_) has the
words “Said upon approaching triumphantly to the Hall of Righteousness.”
But the texts generally begin with the invocation, “Hail ye gods, I know
you and I know your names.”

32. _Reverse of mine_, ⁂⁂, a turn of the wheel, which the
context implies to be unfortunate. A very absurd reading is
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, as if the defendant were master of the
fates of his divine judges.

33. _The King who resideth within His own Day._ A very doubtful passage
at present. The words do not occur in the oldest text of the chapter
(that of Nebseni), and they are omitted here in the later recensions.
_Ad_ is, as far as I know, the only authority for ⁂⁂⁂⁂;
other papyri having merely ⁂, which might possibly correspond to
the ⁂⁂ immediately preceding. The Royal tombs have
⁂⁂⁂⁂, and one of the papyri has ⁂⁂⁂ instead of
⁂⁂⁂. All this reminds one of an obscure passage in Chapter
115, where Rā is speaking with ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂
according to the Text of the Turin _Todtenbuch_. Goodwin conjectured
that King Amhauf belonged ‘to the race of mythical kings who preceded
Menes,’ and that his history is ‘a legend somewhat analogous to that of
Deucalion and Pyrrha.’ There is a much more probable solution of the
matter.

⁂⁂⁂ is meant for ⁂⁂⁂ _Sut_, and it was with this god
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ or ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂[133] ‘in his
_course_’ that Rā was speaking when the disaster happened to the latter
divinity, who for his talk had chosen a wrong _moment_, which really
belonged to his adversary. _Cf. supra_ note 3 on Chapter 110.

And here too I would instead of ⁂⁂ read ⁂⁂, and the
sense of the passage would be “let not reverse of mine come to pass
through Sutu, when his time cometh.”

34. _Cares_, ⁂⁂ in the later texts. The older texts differ
greatly from each other: ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ is the most frequent
reading.

35. _The Ass and the Cat in the house of Hept-ro._ The two personages
who take part in this dialogue are known from other portions of the Book
of the Dead. The Cat is Rā in the 17th chapter. And the Ass appears in
the 40th chapter, as the victim of the devouring Serpent. The Sun-god
overcome by darkness is Osiris; and he is so called by name in the
Demotic version of this chapter.

_Hepṭ-ro_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, ‘god of the gaping mouth.’ The word
⁂⁂⁂ is not found elsewhere, but the meaning of it seems to be
indicated by the determinative. It is very probably akin to the more
common ⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂, which does not mean ‘squat’ or ‘sit,’
but ‘stretch out,’ _distendi_. _Cf._ Note 6, Chapter 63B.

The ‘house of the god of the gaping mouth,’ seems to be the _Earth_,
considered as the universal tomb (ἀλλ’ αὐτοῦ γαῖα μέλαινα πᾶσι χάνοι,
Il. 14, 417). And here Osiris and Rā (the Ass and the Cat) meet daily,
‘Yesterday’ speaketh to ‘To-day.’

                           יוס ליוס יביע אמר

36. _Verdict_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂⁂,
⁂⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂⁂.

A note of M. Guyesse in the _Recueil_, X, p. 64, contains references to
the chief passages in which this word occurs. I will add a very
important one, the picture of a god (Lefébure, _Tombeau de Seti_, p.
III, pl. 33) with sword in hand, whose name is this word. The
ideographic signs which express it imply (1) ‘a _cutting_ in two,
parting, division,’ (2) that the act is one of speech or intellect, such
as ‘judgment, decision, verdict.’ The phonetic equivalence of the signs
⁂ and ⁂ or ⁂ show that the value is that of _Seb_.

37. _Covereth._ The right Egyptian word here, as in a similar passage in
Chapter 17, is uncertain, but the meaning is plain enough. There are
many pictures showing a divinity (the sun or moon-god) hidden within or
behind a tree.

38. _That the Balance may be set upon its stand within the bower of
amaranth._

_Cf._ the passage (Rochemonteix, _Edfou_, p. 191) where mention is made
of the divine powers which animate the Princes who are in the train of
Osiris and who lift the Balance upon the stand before them
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

_Amaranth_ (see Note 3 of Chapter 26) is only one of the readings of
this doubtful text.

39. _Disasters_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ bad luck, misfortune.
See my note on this word, _T.S.B.A._, II, p. 313.

40. _Grasshoppers_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. The similar word סלעם, which
only occurs in Lev. xi, 22, does not appear to be Semitic. It is a
sufficiently familiar word in Egyptian to serve as a term in comparison,
‘as plentiful as grasshoppers.’

41. The text here is quite uncertain. The Turin _Todtenbuch_ has “the
fourth hour of the Night and the eighth hour of the Day,” which does not
agree with any early reading. _Cd._ has “the fourth hour of the Night
and of the Day.” Several papyri have the “second hour of the Night and
the third ⁂⁂⁂ of the Day.” It was in this passage, as written
in B.M. 9904, that, in the year 1860, I found the phonetic value of the
Egyptian number 3: a discovery first ascribed by Brugsch[134] to
Goodwin, and afterwards by others to Brugsch himself.

42. _The hearts of the gods are appeased_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.
_Cf._ ⲛⲁⲓ, ἱλάσκεσθαι, and ⲛⲁⲏⲧ, ἐλεήμων, οἰκτίρμων. This explains Pap.
Prisse XVII, 6 ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

43. _Let him come._ ⁂⁂⁂ is a tolerably certain reading, but it
is not possible to say what should be the word preceding this. The
scribes have written ‘there he cometh,’ ‘we grant that he come,’ ‘I
grant,’ ‘let him be brought in,’ and the like.

44. _He who groweth under the Grass_,
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

45. _A thigh_, ⁂⁂⁂, also written ⁂⁂.

46. _See the greetings_: φωνῇ γαρ ὁρῶ, τὸ φατιζόμενον, _Oedip. Col._
138.

47. _The Leaf_, ⁂⁂⁂.

48. _Pointer_ [or _Plummet_] _of Truth_,
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

49. _The Scale Pan_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂.

50. _The Dragon Brood_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂.

51. _The Truncheon of Hathor_, ⁂⁂⁂ does not appear to be a very
familiar word to the scribes, who write it in the most diverse ways
possible; one of them even understanding it as the ‘opening of heaven’
⁂. All that we can say is that the word is shown by its
determinative to be of _wood_, and by its etymology (_cf._ ⁂⁂,
⁂) to serve for _striking_, _blinding_, or _slaying_. Some of the
texts name Hathor, and others Nephthys. The sign ⁂ occurs in both
names, and the scribes have read the rest of the name as best they
could.

52. _He who knoweth the heart and exploreth the person_,
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. This is so exactly the
equivalent of “Searching the heart and trying the reins” of Jeremiah
(xvii, 10), that we might have expected to find something like it in the
Coptic version of the Bible. But there we have nothing but a close
adherence to the sense of the Septuagint, and even to such a word as
δοκιμάζειν.

53. _Who provideth for._ ⁂⁂⁂ is the equivalent of the Greek
φρονεῖν in the inscription of Tanis, and of μέριμνα in the Demotic text
of the verses of Moschion. The Coptic form is ⲙⲉⲩⲓ, ⲙⲉⲉⲩⲉ, which stands
for φρονεῖν in Phil. iv, 10, “Your _care_ of me, wherein ye also were
_careful_.”

Thoth is thus represented as the divine Providence, which takes care of
the universe. The same view is found in a text at Edfu.

54. _The Eye_ of Horus; see latter part of Note 2, of this chapter.

-----

Footnote 111:

  Apparently suggested by the scene in the tomb of Hor-em-heb (see
  _Denkm._, III, 78), in the time of Amenophis III. (Plate XXXII, fig.
  15.)

Footnote 112:

  The picture of the Babe lifted up into the upper world by two
  divinities speaks for itself. Of the birth of the Sun as the Winged
  Scarab at the beginning of the first hour of the day, M. Maspero, in
  his description of the text, says: “Il est salué à ton apparition par
  les huit ... ‘les esprits d’Orient, dieux du ciel, des terres, des
  pays étrangers, de la montagne d’horizon orientale qui est On.’”

Footnote 113:

  This is the principle by which to judge the cases of the
  _Facing-backward_ god ⁂⁂⁂⁂ serpentine, or crocodile
  ⁂⁂⁂, and of Uammeta ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, against
  both of whom a passage of the ‘Book of Hades’ (Bonomi, _Sarc._, pl. II
  A) has been quoted. The book, of course, is of inferior authority to
  the ‘Book of the Dead,’ but in any case it must be remembered that
  these names, as appellatives, are _common_ nouns (_Uammeta_ is in the
  _plural_ number in the passage in question), and may simply mean
  _Serpents_. Sutu is called by the first of these names at Edfu
  (_Zeitschr._, 1871, p. 108). But even at Dendera (Lanzone, _Diz._, pl.
  173, 1) this ‘god of serpent face’ is ‘disastrous to the Sebau,’ the
  enemies of Osiris and Rā, and is therefore not one of them. His soul
  is invoked like those of all the great gods in the royal tombs.

Footnote 114:

  The ⁂ is not to be read _fi_ or _fy_. The sign ⁂ is merely
  the ideogram of the number 2, like the letter ⲃ in Coptic. The belief
  in an Egyptian dual with ⁂ as a final syllable is an illusion,
  though a very pardonable one, of our grammarians.

Footnote 115:

  Or _Vultures_. _See_ M. Gayet’s _Temple de Luxor_, Pl. xliii, fig.
  127, where the Bird at each end of the picture holds ⁂ in its
  claw. And note the tabernacles (a very frequent picture) where a
  winged goddess bearing the ⁂ kneels on either side of the solar
  scarab.

Footnote 116:

  Or as it is said in other words (Teta, 172; Pepi I, 130; Pepi II, 107,
  and Merenra, 152), “Seb hath brought to thy side thy two sisters, Isis
  and Nephthys.”

Footnote 117:

  A very conceivable, because a very frequent, one.

Footnote 118:

              “His sons were kept in prison, till they grew
              Of years to fill a bowstring or a throne.”

Footnote 119:

  To quote only well known cases, we have ‘the massacre of the princes,’
  involving the two uncles and seven cousins of the Emperor Constantius,
  and those of our own King John and Richard III.

Footnote 120:

  The legislation of Solon is said by Diogenes Laertius (who is however
  contradicted by notorious evidence) to have excluded from the position
  of guardian anyone who had the right of succession to the ward’s
  estate. And this was also the law of England with reference to
  guardians in socage. In France the next in succession had the charge
  of the estate, but was excluded from the custody of the person of the
  ward.

Footnote 121:

  The true sense of the name has been missed by Birch, who reads it
  Teti, and by Brugsch, who reads it “Chonti, der Anfängliche.” At
  Beb-el-moluk it is written ⁂⁂⁂.

Footnote 122:

  _D. Aegyptische Elle_, Taf. 1 and 2.

Footnote 123:

  _Cf._ the forms ⁂`⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂ and
  ⁂⁂⁂⁂ (Naville, _Litanies_, pp. 55, 83, and the
  corresponding texts) of one of the Solar names.

Footnote 124:

  On the other hand in the standard ⁂ of Dendera, the Crocodile is
  Sut, and the Feather upon his head is Osiris.

Footnote 125:

  Her son Horus inherited these gifts. He is invoked (_Metternich
  Stele_, line 106),
  ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

Footnote 126:

  Rechmarā filled this office shortly before this, in the time of
  Thothmes III, and the inscriptions of his tomb give interesting
  information of the duties discharged. His clerks are praised for the
  virtue of discretion (18th Precept). Each heard the reports read by
  others, but without troubling himself with what did not concern him.
  See next note.

Footnote 127:

  This office is often referred to by Greek writers as existing in the
  Persian hierarchy. Pseudartabas, the ‘King’s Eye,’ is one of the
  Dramatis Personæ in the _Acharnians_ of Aristophanes. Herodotus (1,
  114) tells how Cyrus being chosen king by his playfellows, selected
  his principal officers, and one among the boys to be the ‘King’s Eye.’
  Aeschylus does not forget in his _Persae_ (line 976) to make the
  Chorus bewail the loss of the King’s faithful Eye.

  The most ancient personage who is known to me as the ‘King’s Eye’ in
  Egypt is Antuf, whose tablet (of the 12th dynasty) is in the Louvre
  (C. 26). His duties are detailed on this magnificent tablet, and they
  are very similar to those of Rechmarā. He is described not only as the
  King’s Eyes which see, but ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂
  the “Tongue which speaks, of the lord of the Palace.”

Footnote 128:

  ⁂⁂ in cursive writing might be mistaken for ⁂⁂ or for
  ⁂⁂, and the scribe, to show his learning, might interpolate
  the ⁂, but even this might be an error for ⁂.

Footnote 129:

  The determinatives in ⁂⁂, ⁂⁂, express the sense of
  _division_, διαμελισμός, and the insect (a scolopendron) in ⁂⁂
  exhibits the very notion which has given rise to the Latin _insecta_
  and the Greek ἔντομον

Footnote 130:

  For more particular details, see P.S.B.A., viii, p. 245, and
  following.

Footnote 131:

  Ἀκούειν τι τοῦ λόγου, παρακούειν δε: _Ethic. Nich._, viii. 7.

Footnote 132:

  There is no such god as _Min_ or _Minu_, except as an abbreviated (or
  perhaps primitive) _orthographic_ form of _Amon_. ⁂⁂⁂ and
  ⁂⁂ bear to ⁂⁂⁂ exactly the same relationship
  that ⁂⁂, ⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂, have to
  ⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂ and ⁂⁂⁂⁂.

  Neither _Amen_ nor the shorter form can be the phonetic equivalent of
  ⁂. The image of Horus with the Flail at Edfu is described (J. de
  Rougé, pl. C. III) as ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, _Horus as
  Amsu-Amen_, and I have elsewhere quoted from _Tempel insch._, I, 32,
  the ⁂⁂⁂ _Amsu- Men_ [or _Amen_] as well as ⁂⁂
  _Amsu Horus_.

Footnote 133:

  The Luynes papyrus reads ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, which affords
  good reason for thinking that in Chapter 115, as elsewhere, ⁂
  was originally written without its phonetic value.

Footnote 134:

  _Zeitschr._, No. 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XL.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration: CHAPTER CXXVI. =Papyrus of Ani.=]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXXVI.
  =Papyrus, British Museum. No. 9913.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXXIX.
  =Musée du Louvre, Papyrus III, 36.=
]

[Illustration: CHAPTER CXXX. =Papyrus, Leyden, VI.=]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XLI.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXXXI.
  =Papyrus, Musée du Louvre, No. 3079.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXXXII.
  =Brit. Mus. Papyrus, No. 9964.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXXXII.
  =Papyrus, Brocklehurst, II.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXXXIII.
  =Papyrus, British Museum, No. 9900.=
]

[Illustration: CHAPTER CXXXIV. =Papyrus of Ani, British Museum.=]

[Illustration: CHAPTER CXXXIV. =Papyrus, British Museum, No. 9900.=]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXXXVI.
  =Papyrus, Brit. Mus., No. 9913.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXXXVI.
  =Papyrus, Brit. Mus., No. 9900.=
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER CXXVI.


Oh ye four Harbingers(1.) who sit at the prow of the Bark of Rā, and
convey the fixed ordinances(2.) of the Inviolate One, ye who are judges
of my distress(3.) and of my good fortune, and propitiate the gods with
the flames from your mouths: ye who present to the gods their oblations
and the sacrificial meals to the Glorified: ye who live through Maāt and
are sated with Maāt: who have nothing wrong in you and execrate that
which is disordered,(4.) do ye put an end to my ills and remove that
which is disorderly in me through my being smitten to the earth.(5.)

Grant that I may penetrate into the Ammehit and enter into Restau; and
that I may pass through the mysterious portals of Amenta.

Be there given to me the Shensu cakes and the Persen cakes [and all
things] even as to the Glorified, who make their appearance on entering
into Restau or on coming forth.(6.)

Enter thou, Osiris _N_: We put an end to thine ills, and we remove that
which is disorderly in thee through thy being smitten to the earth. We
put away from thee all the ills which thou hast. Enter thou into Restau
and pass through the mysterious portals of Amenta. Enter thou in and
come forth at thy pleasure, like the Glorified ones; and be thou invoked
each day in the Mount of Glory.(7.)

                                 NOTES.

In the older papyri the vignette of this chapter is unaccompanied by any
text. The only exception as yet known is that of the papyrus _Ab_, of
the XVIIIth dynasty. The text is also found in the tomb of Rameses VI,
with the important addition of the answer made by the four _Harbingers_
to the prayer of the deceased. This addition is retained in all the
later recensions. Other discrepancies between the two texts lead to the
conclusion that even the older one has suffered from interpolation.

1. _Harbingers_ or _Saluters_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. See Chapter 5,
Note 5, for an explanation of the name of those Apes who salute[135] the
Daybreak. Here _four_ only are spoken of, and this was probably the
original number, corresponding to the four portals of the Mount of
Glory. The number _eight_ (the Chemunnu) is more easy to explain than
_six_, which is the number stated in the text quoted from the tomb of
Rameses VI.

2. _Fixed ordinances_, ⁂⁂; θέμιστες in the different acceptations
of that word.

3. _Distress_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂. “Te semper anteit saeva
_necessitas_,” Horace says to Fortuna. The determinative ⁂ and the
Coptic ⲙⲣ̄ evidently point to the notion of _constraint_, but the few
texts in which the word is found imply _want_, _need_ (_angustiæ_,
ἀνάγκη),[136] rather than captivity. Amenemhat at Benihassan (tomb 2)
boasts that in his days and under his government no one was seen “in
distress (⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂), or starving.” And Horus at Edfu
(Naville, _Mythe d’Horus_, pl. XXII) is said to protect the _needy_ or
_distressed_ (⁂⁂⁂) against the powerful. This is an honour
already claimed by Antuf on his tablet (Louvre, C. 26 line 17), who
mentions the _maȧru_ as being an object of interest to him, like the
orphan and the widow.

4. _Disordered_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, is the absence of ⁂⁂,
strict _order_, and always spoken of as in opposition to it. One is
κόσμος and the other is οὐ κατὰ κόσμον, and may be predicated of
whatever is contrary to rule, faulty, defective, out of line, deformed,
or disfigured, not only in a moral but in a purely physical sense.

⁂⁂, _ill_, does not mean _wickedness_ or _sin_, but simply
physical evil, mischief, pain or sorrow. There are many texts to prove
this, but perhaps the most interesting is the great text at Dendera
(Mariette, _Denderah_, IV, pl. 73, or Dümichen, _Rec._, III, pl. 96),
where Osiris is invoked at Apu (Panopolis) as the fiery Bull, hiding (or
scarcely seen) on the day of the New Moon ..., but at length rising into
full strength,[137] and seeing the Golden Horus fixed upon the throne of
the universe. ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ (continues the text),
“Joy cometh round after[138] pain,” or sorrow; most certainly, not after
_sin_.

The meaning of ⁂, which governs the noun, has been explained
(Chapter 40, Note 6) as _stopping_, _bringing to an end_; not
_destroying_, and still less _forgiving_.

5. _Through my being_ [or _because I am_] _smitten to the earth_,
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

⁂⁂ in this position, without a suffix or nominal subject, is not
an auxiliary verb, but a particle of correlation, used when a cause,
motive, or circumstance is asserted or implied in connection with a
preceding statement.

Like all such particles, of which the function was originally only
deictic, it is susceptible of very many shades of meaning, and it would
be impossible in this place to do justice to a word so frequently
occurring, especially in the hieratic papyri of a secular character. The
following examples are only intended to illustrate its _grammatical_ use
in our text.

The particle occurs three times before as many propositions at the
beginning of Chapter 123; ‘I have balanced the divine Pair,’ ‘I have put
a stop, _etc._,’ ‘I have ended their complaints;’ ⁂⁂ connects each
of these statements with the preceding one, ‘I am Thoth.’ It is as if
the speaker said, ‘_It is in consequence of_ my being Thoth, that I have
balanced,’ _etc._

In Chapter 36, ‘I am the bearer of the divine words’ is followed by
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, ‘and _so it comes that_ I make the
report.’

In Chapter 15, line 7, ‘I am one of those who honoured thee upon earth’
is followed by ⁂⁂⁂⁂ ... “let me _therefore_ attain to the
Land of eternity.”

Aahmes, the son of Abana, says in his inscription (line 5) that he was
young and unwedded, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ “_and so_ I continued to
wear” a certain dress.

Amenemheb was, he tells us (_Zeitschr._, 1873, p. 3), high in the favour
of the King, “_and so it comes that_ I followed my Lord
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.”

Una was sent by his sovereign on a certain mission, and the negro
chieftains of certain districts furnished the wood for his purpose,
“_and so it came to pass that_ he spent ⁂⁂⁂ a year in this
wise.“

After _verba dicendi_ ⁂⁂ corresponds to our as _how_, _comme
quoi_, or the _quod_ or _quia_ of late Latinity. It often needs no more
translation than the Greek ὅτι in such a relation.

In the inscription of Pianchi (line 2) one came to tell his Majesty
“_that_ (_comme quoi_) a prince [or magnate] had started up
⁂⁂⁂⁂” and seized upon a part of the kingdom.

⁂⁂⁂ most certainly does not mean ‘est, est,’ any more than it
means ‘Dominus meus mortuus est.’

Nebuaiu (_Zeitschr._, 1876, p. 5) in the time of Thothmes III
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ “says, _as how_ ‘I have presided over
many constructions.’”

The Naophoros of the Vatican in like manner ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ “says
_that_ ‘I made a petition’” to Cambyses.

Long before this Chnumhotep of Benihassan begins his biography (line 14)
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ “his mouth, it says _as how_ ‘his Majesty
appointed me’ to the dignity of _Erpā ḥā_.”

The absence of Verbal character becomes especially apparent in such
combinations ⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂.

6. The older texts finish here. What follows in the translation is taken
from the later recensions. It is the reply made by the four Harbingers
to the prayer addressed to them.

7. _Mount of Glory_ ⁂. This is the real meaning of the word, and
there is no reason why we should continue to use the misleading term
_horizon_.

-----

Footnote 135:

  The Gothic _Hana_ (the Cock), German _Hahn_ and our _Hen_ signify the
  _Singer_, and are words cognate to the Latin _can-ere_. The Latin
  _Gallus_ is probably related to our _call_.

Footnote 136:

  The Greek language would furnish an interesting parallel to the
  Egyptian if it could be shown that δέω, _bind_, and δέω, _want_,
  _need_, had the same root. But the latter was originally δέϝω.

Footnote 137:

  Such is the real meaning of ⁂⁂⁂⁂, not only in
  this place, but in the extremely ancient text found on many
  sarcophagi and already in the Pyramid Texts (see Pepi I, 33),
  ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂,
  “Thy mother Nut bringeth it to pass that thou risest into full
  strength, without an adversary, in thy name of _the Strong one_.”

  In this translation it is assumed that the second ⁂ is the
  negative ⁂, as it was always understood in later times (see for
  an instance _Zeitschr._, 1869, p. 51, and the beautiful text of
  Bakenrenf, _Denkm._, III, 263).

  The true meaning of ⁂⁂ is not simply ‘this god’ but ‘the
  Strong one,’ ὁ Ισχύων. ⁂⁂ is the ‘Strong and Beautiful;’
  ⁂⁂ is אל שׁדי, ὁ Παντοκράτωρ.

Footnote 138:

  That is, ‘succeedeth.’

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER CXXVII.

_The Book_(1.) _for invoking the gods of the Bounds,_(2.) _which the
  person reciteth when he approacheth them, that he may enter and see
  the Strong one_(3.) _in the Great Abode of the Tuat._


Hail, ye gods of the Bounds, who are in Amenta.

Hail, ye Doorkeepers of the Tuat, who guard this Strong one, and who
bring the reports before Osiris; ye who protect them who worship you,
and who annihilate the adversaries of Rā: who give light and put away
your darkness: ye who see and extol your Great one, who live even as he
liveth, and invoke him who is in his Solar disk.

Guide me, and let the gates of Heaven, Earth, and the Tuat be opened to
me.

I am the Soul of Osiris and rest in him.

Let me pass through the Gateways, and let them raise acclamation when
they see me.

Let me enter as I will, and come forth at my pleasure, and make my way
without there being found any defect or any evil attaching to me.

                                 NOTES.

The text which has been followed in the translation of this chapter is
that of the Royal Tombs of Rameses IV and Rameses VI, called by M.
Naville Chapter 127 A. The lost Busca papyrus, of which Lepsius had a
tracing, furnishes a different text, (127 B), and the text of the Turin
_Todtenbuch_ has been enlarged by means of numerous interpolations. M.
Naville has called attention to the close relationship between this
chapter and the second part of the “Solar Litany.”

1. _Book_ ⁂⁂, properly a _Roll_; a title given to several of the
chapters (125, 127, 129, 130, 140, 141, 142 and 148 in the Turin
_Todtenbuch_), instead of the usual ⁂. Too much importance should not
be attached to the difference of terms. This chapter is called ⁂ by
the Busca papyrus; and Chapter 125, which is called ⁂ in the earliest
texts containing it whenever a title is given, is called ⁂⁂ ever
since the time of Rameses IV.

2. _Bounds_, ⁂⁂⁂, in the dual form, though ⁂⁂⁂
is not unfrequent, here and in other places. The English word is not a
translation of the Egyptian one, which has to be explained before any
equivalent for it can be proposed. And the explanation of it has to be
sought in the ‘Solar Litany,’ first completely published by M. Naville.

There we find the Sun-god Rā invoked as a Power _pouring itself forth_
or _overflowing_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂[139] in 75 _forms_ and the
_forms_ in 75 ⁂⁂⁂. Each of these divine _forms_ (⁂⁂⁂)
has its own ⁂⁂⁂ as a dwelling-place, to which however it is
not confined.

The seventy-five Forms in question (each of which is a god) are, as the
text itself shows, simply so many names of the Solar god or solar
phenomena. Each of them is addressed as ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, ‘Rā,
supreme of power,’ after which some attribute of the deity is mentioned,
and the name of the deity is connected with this attribute.

In Greece, Apollo was called ἑκηβόλος, καταιβάσιος, ἀποτροπαῖος,
νεομήνιος, and by ever so many other names expressive of the attributes
with which he was credited. These names correspond to what Egyptian
mythology called the ⁂⁂⁂ of a god, and each of the names has
but a limited application. The god is not always thought of as
‘Far-darting’; under the conception of ‘Neomenios,’ he _dwells_ in what
Egyptian mythology called another ⁂⁂, which is the local
habitation, or, as mathematicians would say, the _locus_ of the concept.

M. de Rougé, without giving any reason, but probably guided by what
Champollion had written, translates the word _zone_. M. Naville, who has
carefully studied the word, prefers _sphere_. And no better word could
be thought of, if we used it as we do in speaking of ‘moving in a
certain sphere,’ ‘each in his own sphere,’ or, ‘the sphere of action;’
without applying a strict geometrical sense to the word. For the
Egyptian ⁂⁂ was a hollow cylinder like a round tower, a chimney,
or a deep well rather than a sphere.

With the explanation I have just given, I prefer _Bounds_ as a more
expressive translation. The word appears in the dual form on account of
the presence of the god.

The name ⁂⁂⁂ was given to the fabulous Source of the
Nile, supposed to be in the neighbourhood of Elephantine. The
inscription of Seti I at Redesieh (_Denkm._, III, 140B) compares the
abundance of water at the King’s cistern to that of the
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ “the cavern of the
double Well of Elephantine.”

In the later orthography the word is written ⁂ or ⁂⁂. It has
been supposed that the Coptic ⲕⲟⲣⲓ _cataracts_ might be connected with
the old Egyptian name. But the history of the Coptic word is not
sufficiently known to justify any inferences.

3. _The Strong one_, ⁂⁂, the name of Osiris. See footnote to
Chapter 126, Note 4.

-----

Footnote 139:

  M. Naville leaves this word untranslated, though he rightly
  conjectures it to be the origin of ϫⲱϣ _effundere_, _effusio_,
  _infundere_, _immergere_.

  ⁂⁂⁂ at chapter 64, 23, is undoubtedly the _overflowing_,
  or _outpouring_. There are the reduplicated Coptic forms ϭⲉϣϭϣ and
  ϭⲉϣϭⲱϣ; and ϭⲉϣⲉ, a name of the _goose_, has its origin in
  ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, and has the same sense etymologically as
  the Latin _mergus_.

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER CXXVIII.

                        _Invocation of Osiris._


Hail to thee, Osiris Unneferu, son of Nut and eldest son of Seb: the
Great One who proceedeth from Nut; the king in Taa-urit;(1.) the Prince
in Amenta; the Lord of Abydos; the Lord of Forces; the most Mighty; the
Lord of the Atef crown in Suten-hunen, the Lord of Power in
Taa-urit,(2.) the Lord of the Mansion: most Powerful in Tattu: Lord of
Administration,(3.) and of many festivals in Tattu.

Horus exalteth his father Osiris in every place; associating Isis the
Great with her sister Nephthys.

Thoth speaketh to [Horus] with the potent utterances(4.) which have in
himself their origin and proceed from his mouth, and which strengthen
the heart of Horus beyond all gods.

=Rise up Horus, son of Isis, and restore thy father Osiris!=

Ha, Osiris! I am come to thee; I am Horus and I restore thee unto life
upon this day, with the funereal offerings and all good things for
Osiris.

Rise up, then, Osiris: I have stricken down for thee thine enemies, I
have delivered thee from them.

I am Horus on this fair day, at the beautiful coming forth(5.) of thy
Powers: who lifteth thee up with himself on this fair day as thine
associate god.(6.)

Ha, Osiris! thou hast come and with thee thy _Ka_, which uniteth with
thee in thy name of Ka-hotep.(7.)

He glorifieth thee in thy name of the Glorified: he invoketh thee in thy
name of Hekau: he openeth for thee the paths in thy name of Ap-uat.(8.)

Ha, Osiris! I am come to thee that I may set thine adversaries beneath
thee in every place, and that thou mayest be triumphant in presence of
all the gods who are around thee.

Ha, Osiris! thou hast received thy sceptre, thy pedestal and the flight
of stairs beneath thee.(9.)

Regulate thou the festivals of the gods, and do thou regulate the
oblations to those who reside in their mansions.

Grant thou thy greatness to the gods whom thou hast made, great god, and
make thine appearance with them as their Ensign.(10.)

Take thou precedence(11.) over all the gods and listen to the Voice of
Maāt on this day.

_Said over the oblations made to the Strong One on the Festival of
Uaka._(12.)

                                 NOTES.

The ancient papyri do not contain this chapter. The translation follows
the text of the Turin _Todtenbuch_, occasionally corrected by other
papyri of the later period. There is nothing specially interesting in
the chapter: the first portion of it is an invocation to Osiris under
certain names, as in many other hymns[140] to the god from the time of
the XIIth dynasty down to the latest times: the latter portion consists
of evocations addressed by Horus to his father. Their prototype is to be
found in formulas frequent in the Pyramid Texts. These were much admired
and imitated in the Saïtic and the later periods.

1. _King in Tau-urit_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. Osiris is also
called ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ at Philæ. And in the second line
of this chapter he is called ⁂⁂⁂ _in Tau-urit_ which, if not
identical with Abydos, must have been a part of that town or in its
immediate neighbourhood.

2. ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ is equivalent to ⁂⁂⁂,
the title of Osiris in _Pepi I_, line 8. And the Power is defined as
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ “thy Power which is upon the
Glorified.”

3. _Administration_ ⁂; literally _things_. See note 3 on Chapter 18.

4. _Utterances_ ⁂⁂. See note 2 on Chapter 1, and compare
_Merenrā_, 103, and _Pepi II_, 13.

5. _Coming forth_ ⁂. _Cf._ ϣⲁⲓ, ἀνατέλλειν, ἀνατολὴ, and the
meanings ἐξοδεία and ἑορτή, which, on the tablet of Canopus, correspond
to the Egyptian ⁂. The first hour after sunrise was called
⁂⁂⁂⁂; so that “the beautiful Coming forth of thy Powers”
may be a mere technical periphrasis for daybreak.

Besides the ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ of Rā in Chapter 17, it is well to
remember such proper names as ⁂⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂,
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂⁂,
⁂⁂⁂ and ⁂⁂⁂, with several others.

6. _Thine associate god_, or _one of those about thee_,
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

See Note 2 on Chapter 18. M. Chabas in his commentary upon the fine hymn
translated by him in the _Rev. Arch._, 1857, considers it “une
circonstance bizarre” that Osiris is several times included among his
‘_Djadjou_.’ The _bizarrerie_ is easily explained by parallel
expressions known to every Greek scholar, οἱ ἀμφὶ Πεισίστρατον in
Herodotus means _Pisistratus with his troops_, and in Thucydides, οἱ
περι Θρασυβουλον means _Thrasybulus with his soldiers_. In the Iliad (3,
146) οἱ ἀμφὶ Πρίαμον is explained by the Scholiast as meaning _Priam
himself_: τοῦτ ἐστιν, ὁ Πρίαμος.

7. This passage as it stands is the alteration of one of the Pyramid
Texts (Teta, 284; Pepi I, 54): “Horus hath brought to pass that _his Ka_
[? image] which is in thee should unite with thee in thy name of
Ka-hotep.”

8. This whole passage is also taken from the Pyramid Texts. Its chief
value in this place is in evidence of a truth not yet generally
acknowledged by Egyptologists, that _Ap-uat_ (or as written in the
Pyramid Texts, _Up-uat_) is really Osiris. The proofs are numerous and
overwhelming.

I produced evidence of this identity in the P.S.B.A. of June 1, 1886,
from an obelisk of the XIIth dynasty now at Alnwick Castle, and in 1891
Brugsch published in his _Thesaurus_ (p. 1420) a tablet, now in the
Louvre, of the same period as the obelisk, which also treats Ap-uat as
one of the names of Osiris. But the earliest as well as the most
instructive evidence is that of the Pyramid Texts. The later form of it
is thus given on the coffin of _Nes-Shu-Tefnut_ at Vienna (see Bergman,
_Recueil_, VI, p. 165): “Horus openeth for thee thy Two Eyes that thou
mayest see with them in thy name of Ap-uat.”

But the Pyramids of Teta (l. 281) and Pepi (l. 131) say, “Horus openeth
for thee thine Eye that thou mayest see with _it_ in _its_ name
_Ap-uat_.” Each of the Eyes of Osiris is Ap-uat, one of them is the
Southern and the other is the Northern Jackal. These two facing each
other form part of the symbolism explained in Note 2 upon Chapter 125.

The figure of the Jackal is wholly insufficient as an argument that
Ap-uat is identical with Anubis. Much better evidence is found in the
fact that the name of Anubis is sometimes written over the figure.[141]
But the true explanation of this is, what might have seemed incredible
to some of our older scholars, that Anubis is itself only one of the
names of Osiris.

The Pyramids of Pepi I (line 474 and following) and Pepi II (l. 1262 and
following) give imaginary etymologies of certain names of Osiris which
are repeated in the inscriptions of the tomb of Horhotep, published by
M. Maspero (_Miss. Arch._, I, 260). One of these names is ⁂⁂,
which is said to be derived from ⁂, “pass thou over to me.” The next
is ⁂⁂⁂⁂ _Anpu_, which is derived from ⁂⁂! The true
meaning of ⁂⁂⁂ is not _jackal_, but _whelp_; the fierce young
of an animal; not only of jackals or lions but of men, kings or gods,
⁂⁂⁂. Thus Orestes speaks (Eur., _Orest._, 1) of σκύμνον
ἀνοσίου πατρός, and the Chorus of another play talks of the reception of
τὸν Ἀχίλλειον σκύμνον (_Andr._, 1170). And Shakespeare speaks of “the
young whelp of Talbot’s raging brood.”

9. _Pedestal_, ⁂⁂⁂; the _stand_ upon which the images or
emblems of the god were carried in procession. The ⁂ is very
frequently supported by it; ⁂.

_Flight of stairs_, ⁂⁂. See Note 2 on Chapter 22.

10. _Ensign_, _i.e._, _insignis_, one who bears the distinguishing mark
or sign of investiture ⁂⁂⁂⁂.[142] See Note 4 on Chapter 78.

Osiris is here presented as the Sāhu of the gods whom he has called into
existence. The Hymn of the Bibliothèque Nationale (line 7) calls him
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

Chnumhotep at Benihassan says of the king,
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, “he distinguished me
above all his _nobles_,” that is the order of men bearing the sign of
investiture.

11. _Take precedence_, ⁂⁂⁂. I take the word in the same sense
as where it occurs (without the determinative of sound) in _Denkm._,
III, 29a; in parallelism with ⁂⁂.

12. _Uaḳa_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂; in the older texts ⁂⁂⁂ (as in
Pepi I, 98); one of the oldest festivals of the Egyptian calendar, kept
on the 17th and 18th of the month Thoth.

The Pyramid Text says “Behold, he cometh to thee as Orion
(⁂⁂⁂[143]); behold Osiris cometh as Orion the _Lord of Wine_
(⁂⁂⁂, _vinosus_, full of wine), who cometh on the fair
festival of _Uaḳa_.”

_Uaḳa_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂ or ⁂⁂⁂⁂ is also one of the names
given to the Nile.

-----

Footnote 140:

  _Cf._ the Hymn to Osiris in the Bibl. Nationale, the Hymn of Tunrei
  (Mariette, _Mon. div._, pl. 57), and an inscription copied by Mariette
  from the temple of Ptah at Memphis (_Mon. div._, pl. 28 _e_). There
  are plenty others of the same kind.

Footnote 141:

  See Mariette, _Mon. div._, pl. 61, where each of the jackals is
  surmounted with the Eye and bears the name _Ȧnpu_.

Footnote 142:

  The importance of this sign is manifest in the Pyramid Text
  (_Merenrā_, 634), “_N_ maketh his appearance as King, he hath
  possession of his ⁂⁂⁂ and of his throne.” [Since the
  above was in print M. Naville has published an inscription of Queen
  Hatshepsit, in which the remarkable expression ⁂⁂⁂⁂
  occurs three times.

  The word written ⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂⁂, but also
  ⁂⁂⁂⁂ or ⁂⁂⁂⁂ (and also without any
  vowel, though ⁂ is understood), has determinatives in _Pepi_ I,
  635, and _Merenrā_, 509, which imply the sense of _girdle_, _zone_.
  Hence the sense of _neighbourhood_, “the men or places round about
  one.”

Footnote 143:

  Does ⁂ represent what we call the _Belt_ of Orion with its three
  bright stars?

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER CXXIX


is a repetition of Chapter C.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER CXXX.

_A Book whereby the Soul is made to live for ever, on the day of
  entering into the Bark of Rā, and to pass the Sheniu of the Tuat. Made
  on the Birthday of Osiris._(1.)


Opened be the gates of Heaven; opened be the gates of Earth; opened be
the gates of the East; opened be the gates of the West; opened be the
gates of the Southern and of the Northern sanctuaries.

Opened be the gates and thrown wide the portals as Rā riseth up from the
Mount of Glory; opened to him be the doors of the Sektit boat, thrown
open to him be the portals of the Māātit, as he scenteth Shu and setteth
in motion Tefnut, and those follow who are in the train of the Osiris
_N_, who followeth Rā and taketh possession of his arms of steel.(2.)

I am coffined in an ark like Horus, to whom his cradle(3.) is brought:
and secret is the place, hard by his own shrine, which the god openeth
to whom he willeth.

And so it cometh that I lift up Right to the Lord of Right, and that I
make fast the cord which windeth about the shrine.

The Osiris _N_ avoideth the raging storm: the Osiris _N_ is not to be
kept away from Rā, not to be repulsed is he.

Let not the Osiris _N_ advance into the Valley of Darkness: let not the
Osiris _N_ enter into the dungeon of the captives: let him not leap into
the grip of Fate, let him not fall among those who imprison souls or
come forth among those who would drag him behind the slaughtering block
of the Armed god.(4.)

Salutations to you, ye sejant gods.(5.)

The divine Sword(6.) is concealed in the hands of Seb, at daybreak, for
he delighteth in drawing to himself both old and young at his own
season.

And now behold Thoth in the secret of his mysteries. He maketh
purifications and endless reckonings; piercing the steel firmament and
dissipating the storms around him.

And so it cometh that the Osiris _N_ hath reached every station of his.

He hath fashioned his staff, and received the oblations of Rā, the swift
of speed and beautiful in his rising and almighty through what he hath
done.

He putteth an end to his pain and suffering, and the Osiris _N_ putteth
an end to his own pain; yea, he gladdeneth the countenance of Thoth by
the worship of Rā and Osiris.

The Osiris _N_ entereth the Mount of Glory of Rā, who hath made his Bark
and saileth prosperously, lightening up the face of Thoth, that he may
listen to Rā and beat down the obstacles in his way, and put an end to
his adversaries.

Let not the Osiris _N_ be shipwrecked on the great voyage by him whose
face is in his own lap:(7.) for the name of Rā is upon the Osiris, and
his token of honour is on his mouth, which speaketh to him who listeneth
to the words of the Osiris _N_.

Glory to thee, O Rā, Lord of the Mount of Glory. Hail to thee, who
purifiest the generations yet unborn and to whom this great quarter of
heaven offered homage.

The steering keepeth clear from misadventure.

Lo, here is Osiris who proclaimeth Right, because of the marvel in the
West, for he hath put an end to the rage of Apepi, for he is himself the
god in Lion form among the associate gods and protecteth Rā against
Apepi daily, that he may not approach him, and he keepeth watch upon
him. Osiris seizeth the scrolls and receiveth the offerings.

And Thoth supplieth the Osiris _N_ with that which he shall perform for
him. It is granted that the Osiris shall carry Maāt at the head of the
great Bark, and hold up Maāt among the associate gods, and that Osiris
gain endless triumphs.

The Sheniu marshal the Osiris _N_, and they procure for the Osiris a
voyage amid acclamations.

The Satellites of Rā make their round, in the train of the exaltation of
Maāt, who followeth her Lord. And glory is given to the Inviolate one.

The Osiris receiveth the Amsu-staff(8.) wherewith he goeth round Heaven.

The unborn generations of men give him glory, as to one who standeth
without ever resting. Rā exalteth him by this, that he alloweth the
Osiris to disperse the cloud and behold his glories. He maketh firm his
rudders that the Bark may go round in Heaven and that he may make his
appearance in Antu. Thoth is in the centre of his eye, sejant in the
great Bark of Chepera. The Osiris becometh one whose words come to pass.
He it is who passeth over Heaven unto the West, and the Chabasu gods of
Light rise up to him with acclamation. They receive the cable of Rā from
his rowers, and Rā goeth on his round and seeth the Osiris who issueth
his decrees;(9.) the Osiris _N_, the Victorious; in peace! in peace!

Not to be repelled is he; not to be caught by the fire of thy fate. Let
not the tempest of thy mouth come forth against him.

Let not the Osiris _N_ advance upon the paths of misfortune: let him
avoid disasters, let them not attain him.

The Osiris _N_ enters into the Bark of Rā, he succeedeth to thy throne;
he receiveth thine insignia.

The Osiris _N_ inaugurateth the paths of Rā and prayeth that he may
drive off the Lock which cometh out of the flame against thy Bark out of
the great Stream.

But the Osiris _N_ knoweth it, and it attaineth not thy Bark. For the
Osiris _N_ is within it; the Osiris _N_ who maketh the divine offerings.

_Said over a Bark of Rā, coloured in pure green.(10.) And thou shalt
place a picture of the deceased at the prow thereof. And make a Sektit
boat on the right side of it and an Atit boat on the left side of
it._(11.)

                                 NOTES.

1. This title is given to the Chapter in the later recensions, and
nearly resembles that given in the Berlin papyrus of Nechtu-amen (of the
XIXth dynasty). That given in another papyrus of the older period is
quite different,--“_Chapter whereby the Chu is fortified_.” Instead of
the _Sheniu of the Tuat, Ba_ (the papyrus of Nechtuamen) has the _Sheniu
of Fire_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, a reading suggested by the
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _the circuit of fire_, which occurs in the
title of another chapter. The _Sheniu_ of this chapter are living
personages who attend upon the Osiris and greet him with their
acclamations. The word is often translated ‘princes,’ ‘officers,’ but it
signifies _those who are in the circle_ of a king or god, hence
‘ministrants,’ ‘courtiers,’ as in the rubric of Chapter CXXV.

The words _made on the Birth-day of Osiris_ are only found in the later
texts, but the old papyrus _Lc_, which has another title, has the words
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. The important word ⁂⁂⁂ which is
here carelessly omitted is supplied by the rubric. For the Birth-day of
Osiris, was the first of the five supplementary days, added to the year
of 360 days. On this day the chapter was to be recited and the usual
oblations offered (see Note 11). So we must understand ⁂, ‘which is
to be made or done.’

2. _Arms of steel_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂.

3. _Cradle_ or _Nest_, ⁂⁂; the ‘Nest of Reeds’ ⁂⁂ so often
represented in pictures of the later periods.

4. _The Armed god_, ⁂⁂ _Septu_, called ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.
(_Unas_ 282) and ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _septu ābu_, ‘armed with horns,’
that is, rays of light. In pictures he is represented as a hawk armed
with bow and arrows, and there is one picture in which he is in the form
of Bes, destroyer of the _Menti_.

5. _Sejant gods_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. I am compelled for want of a
better word to use the heraldic term which most nearly expresses the
posture of gods sitting on the ground with their knees raised up against
their breasts. The posture is a very common one in Egyptian pictures.
The second Sallier Papyrus represents an unfortunate artisan as sitting,
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ “with his two
knees at the pit of his stomach.” The ⁂⁂⁂⁂ is the limb
between the knee and the pelvis.

6. _This divine Sword_ ⁂⁂⁂. Unseen fate brings down the old
and the young alike to the Grave ever ready to receive them. Seb, the
φυσίζοος αἶα, is here, as elsewhere, spoken of in reference to his
κατοχή of the dead in the Tuat, as in _Unas_ 210.

7. _Whose face is in his own lap_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. _Cf._
Note 5.

8. _The Amsu staff._ The name of it is phonetically written
⁂⁂⁂⁂ in the later texts. It is the emblem both of Osiris
and of Horus, and is constantly represented along with bows, arrows, and
other weapons, in the oldest coffins, as belonging to the celestial
armoury of the deceased person.

9. _Who issueth his decrees. See_ Maspero, _Bibl. Egyptol._ II., p. 3
(note) and 39.

10. _Green._ The Egyptian ⁂⁂ is probably nearer in meaning to
the Greek χλωρός, ‘pale green, yellowish-green.’

11. The Rubric ends here in _Pb_. _Lc._ adds, _“They shall offer bread,
beer, and all good things_ on the Birth-day of Osiris. _And if these
rites are performed for him, his soul will rise up and live for ever; he
will not ever die a second time in the divine Nether world._”

The later texts add the information that the text was discovered in the
great hall of the palace in the time of king Septa, and that it was
found in a pit or chamber in the rock, ⁂⁂⁂. It was made by
Horus for his father Osiris Unneferu. Septa is the fifth royal name on
the great tablet of Abydos.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER CXXXI.

_Chapter whereby one proceedeth into Heaven by the side of Rā._(1.)


Oh Rā(2.) who art shining this night: if there be any one among thy
followers, let him present himself living as a follower of Thoth, who
causeth Horus to come forth this night.

The heart of the Osiris is glad, because he is one at the head of them.

His adversaries are brought to a stop by the warriors(3.) of the Osiris
_N_, who is a follower of Rā, and hath taken his arms of steel.

He cometh to thee, his father Rā, he followeth Shu and calleth for the
Crown. He putteth on Hu(4.) and is arrayed with the Lock which is on the
path of Rā and is his glory.

And he arriveth at the Aged one, at the confines of the Mount of Glory,
and the crown awaiteth him.

The Osiris _N_ raiseth it up.

Thy Soul is with thee, and strong is thy Soul through the terror and the
might which belong to thee, Oh Osiris _N_, who utterest the decrees
which Rā hath spoken in Heaven.

Hail to thee, great god in the East of Heaven, who enterest into the
Bark of Rā in the form of the Divine Hawk and executest the decrees
which have been uttered; thou who strikest with thy sceptre from thy
Bark.

The Osiris _N_ entereth into thy Bark and saileth peacefully to the Fair
West; and Tmu saith to him: Art thou coming in?

Mehenit is millions upon millions in length from Amur to Ta-ur(5.) an
endless river wherein the gods move.

(6.) ... whose path is in the fire; and they travel in the fire who come
behind him.

                                 NOTES.

1. None of the oldest papyri yet known contain this chapter. This of
itself is not an argument against its antiquity, and there is really no
reason for supposing it to be less ancient than the chapter which
precedes it. The latter portion of the text is, however, very corrupt
and we have unfortunately no means as yet of correcting it.

2. _O Rā._ The name of the god is sometimes omitted in MSS. The context,
however, requires its presence. It may nevertheless be asked: how can
the Sun-god be said to be shining in the night?

The question might as pertinently be asked: how can Horus (in the very
same line) be said to come forth in the night? The answer to both these
questions is that the Sun, whether as Rā or as Horus or Osiris, shines
in the night through the agency of Thoth, the Moon. For further
information see Notes to next chapter.

3. _Warriors_ ⁂⁂⁂. I take this group as = ⁂⁂ or
⁂⁂⁂. But a papyrus gives the variant ⁂⁂⁂⁂.

4. _He putteth on Hu._ This, is certainly obscure; but it is not the
less in conformity with the doctrine of the Pyramid texts. The
deceased (_Pepi_ I. 432, _Merira_ 618) is borne to a region where he
is fed from night till daybreak, and then seizes upon the god Hu,
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. And according to other texts (_Unas_,
446, _Teta_, 250) the deceased seizes (⁂) upon Hu, and after Sau
has been fastened to his feet enters the bark and seizes upon
(⁂) the Mount of Glory.

5. _Mehenit_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂, or in the masculine form ⁂⁂, is
the name of the mythological serpent which personifies the subterranean
path from West to East of the Sun’s nightly course. In the _Book of
Hades_ (_e.g._ on the Sarcophagus of Seti, _passim_) it is represented
as extending over the back, top and front of the shrine in which the
Sun-god is borne in his Bark. The many folds of the serpent are
symbolical of the turnings and windings of the river or canal (⁂)
over which the god is conveyed. This river is here described as infinite
in length. This is one of the instances from which it is clear
⁂⁂⁂, like the corresponding Coptic ⲟⲩⲉⲓ, has the meaning of
_length_. See _P.S.B.A._, XVII, 190.

The length ‘from West to East’ is described as ‘from _Amur_ to _Taur_’
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. _Amur_ is known from many texts to
signify the West (see _supra_, Chapter 64, note 13). The East is known
as _Ta-ur_ or _Ta-urit_. The royal Ritual at Abydos (Mariette, I. 37)
says ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. And as one
of the values of the sign ⁂ is _ta_ as in ⁂⁂ (Louvre, B. 14),
I feel sure that we should read _Ta-ur_ (or in the feminine _Ta-urit_)
rather than _Nif-ur_ or _Nif-urit_, even in such passages as those
quoted _supra_ in Chapter 128, notes 1 and 2, which have no necessary
references to earthly geography.

6. There is a corrupt passage here, which I have at present no means of
correcting by manuscript authority. M. Pierret thus renders it: “Le dieu
qui partage les paroles y fait son chemin de millions d’années, seigneur
sans égal, dont le chemin est dans le feu.”

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER CXXXII.

 _Chapter whereby a person is enabled to go round, to visit his dwelling
                           in the Netherworld._


I am the Lion-god who issueth from the Bow,(1.) and therefore have I
shot forth.(2.)

I am the Eye of Horus; and the Eye of Horus is opened at the instant
that I reach the strand, coming with happy issue.

I advance and, lo! there is no defect found in me, and the Balance is
relieved of my case.(3.)

                                 NOTES.

1. _The Bow_, ⁂, often written with the determinative ⁂, of
_stretching_, which is the conception implied in this name of the
instrument. This mythological _Bow_, as I explained, _Proc. Soc. Bibl.
Arch._, VI, 131, is the moon’s _crescent_, which during its course
through the sky is always turned towards the sun; so that a line at
right angles to the chord of the arc passes through the sun’s centre.
From this “very delicate observation,” as Arago calls it, the
Alexandrian astronomer Geminus infers that the moon derives its light
from the sun. The observation evidently had been made in Egypt some
thousands of years before Geminus, and explains why in several chapters
the sun is spoken of as shining in or from the moon.

See also _Proc. Soc. Bibl. Arch._, XVII, 37, on another form of the
myth.

2. I follow the Turin text in omitting a word about which the earlier
texts are not agreed, but which seems to have originated in an alternate
reading for ⁂.

3. See end of Chapter 1 and note. These words are omitted in Turin text.

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER CXXXIII.

_Book whereby the Deceased acquireth Might(1.) in the Netherworld in
  presence of the great Cycle of the gods._ [_Said on the first day of
  the Month_].(2.)


Rā maketh his appearance at the Mount of Glory, with the Cycle of gods
about him: the Strong one issueth from his hidden abode.

The Twinklers(3.) fall away from the Mount of Glory at the East of
Heaven, at the voice of Nut as she buildeth up the paths of Rā, before
the Ancient one who goeth round.

Be thou lift up, O Rā who art in thine shrine; breathe thou the breezes,
inhale the north wind ... (4.)on the day when thou discernest the Land
of Maāt.

Thou dividest them that follow; the Bark advanceth and the Ancient ones
step onwards at thy voice.

Reckon thou thy bones, and set thy limbs, and turn thy face towards the
beautiful Amenta.

For thou art the golden Form,(5.) with a couch of the heavenly orbs,
with the Twinklers amongst whom thou goest round, and art renewed daily.

Acclamation cometh from the Mount of Glory, and greeting from the lines
of measurement.(6.)

The gods who are in heaven, they see the Osiris _N_, they present to him
their adorations as to Rā.

He is the Great one, who seeketh the Crown and reckoneth up that which
is needful.

He is the One, who cometh forth this day from the primeval womb of them
who were before Rā, and his coming forth taketh place upon earth and in
the Netherworld. His coming forth is like Rā daily.

Without haste, but unresting, is the Osiris _N_ on this Land of
Eternity.

Twice blessed is he that seeth with his eyes and heareth with his ears.

Right, right is the Osiris _N_: and his future, his future,(7.) is in
Annu.

His oars are lifted as in the service of Nu.

The Osiris _N_ hath not told what he hath seen; he hath not repeated
what he hath heard in the house of the god who hideth his face.

There are hailing and cries of welcome to the Osiris _N_, the divine
body of Rā, on traversing the Nu, and whilst the _ka_ of the god is
being propitiated, according to his pleasure.

The Osiris _N_ is the Hawk, rich in variety of Forms.

The Deceased acquireth might with Rā, and is enabled to possess power
among the gods, for the gods are made to regard him as one of
themselves, and when the Dead ones see him they fall upon their faces.
He is seen in the Netherworld even as the beams of Rā.

_Said over a Boat of four cubits in length, painted green. And let a
starry sky be made, clean and purified with natron and incense. And see
thou make an image of Rā upon a tablet of light green colour at the prow
of the Boat. And see thou make an image of the Deceased whom thou
lovest, that he may be made strong in this boat, and that his voyage be
made in the Bark of Rā, and that Rā himself may look upon him. Do not do
this for any one except for thine own self, thy father and thy son. And
let them be exceedingly cautious for themselves. The Deceased acquireth
might with Rā, and made to possess power among the gods, who regard him
as one of themselves, and when men or the Dead see him they fall upon
their faces. He is seen in the Netherworld as the image of Rā._(8.)

                                 NOTES.

The earliest known text of this chapter is that of the Tomb of
Amenemhait at Thebes (_Ta_), of the time of Thothmes III. It is almost
as inaccurate as that of Nebseni (_Aa_), or the Brockelhurst _Ax_. Nor
is the text of Ani of any use towards clearing up any of the
difficulties.

1. _Acquireth Might._ ⁂⁂ does not signify _wise_, nor has it
anything to do with _instruction_ or _perfection_, as supposed by other
translators. As an adjective it is used to qualify not only animate but
inanimate things, such as an _egg_, _beer_, and _incense_. The
well-known expressions ⁂⁂⁂ and ⁂⁂⁂ exactly
correspond to the Hebrew עד מאד and מאד מאד. The notion implied, as in
the Hebrew אוד, is that of _strength_.

⁂⁂⁂, in the Prisse Papyrus, is not a _wise_ man, but a
_powerful_ one, _a man of rank or influence_, δυνάμενος, δυνατός.

This is the meaning of the word in such passages as
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ (Rougé, _Inscr. hier._, 80)
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ (_Inscr. of Una_ repeatedly)
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ (_Pap. Prisse_ 17,
1). These expressions are the exact equivalents of the Greek δυνάμενος
παρά τῷ βασιλῆι, Herodot. 7, 5.

The might acquired by the deceased is stated in the final rubric and in
all the titles of the chapter in the later recensions to be
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, with reference to Rā.

2. _Said on the first day of the Month._ These words first appear on the
Papyrus of Ani.

3. _The Twinklers._ The oldest texts in this place have
⁂⁂⁂⁂, though the equivalent and corresponding word a
little further on is ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, which is the usual reading
here in the later recensions. The same meaning may be made out of both
groups. The stars are manifestly alluded to, as being made to disappear
when the Sun makes his appearance. ⁂, or in reduplicated form
⁂⁂⁂, is the pupil of the eye; ⁂⁂ is to _ogle, far
l’occhiata_. ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ on the other hand signifies the
_little tremblers_, “tremulo fulgore micantes.” The glance of the eye is
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.[144] The stars are here considered as so many
eyes, characterised by their tremulous motion.

4. The true text is here quite lost. Some sense might be restored, if we
might read ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ instead of ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. The
latter word is absolute nonsense in this place, whatever determinative
it may have, but the former is the well known name of a tree held sacred
at various places in Egypt. The whole passage then might mean “Enjoy the
north wind, and may the Kabasu trees of thine abode refresh thee.”

5. _The golden Form._ The whole of this passage will become clear after
reading the final rubric and examining the Vignettes of the chapter.

6. _Line of measurement_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. An explanation of this
will be found in the pictures and text of the _Book of Hades_. In
Bonomi’s _Sarcoph._, Plates VII in the act of acclamation, and twelve
others carry the line ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. The use
intended for the line is stated in the text. “The bearers
of the line are those who settle the fields of the Chu,
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.” They are called upon to take
their line and to fix the ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, ⲥⲉⲑⲓⲟϩⲓ, ἄρουρα, the
_arable land_ of each allotment. Rā expresses his satisfaction at the
measurement, and tells the gods and the Chu that their domains are
theirs, and that he provides their food.

7. _His future_ ⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂⁂.

8. The rubric is taken from _Ax_.

-----

Footnote 144:

  The Egyptian word signifying _tremble_ is written either with ⁂
  or with ⁂.

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER CXXXIV.

            _Chapter whereby the Deceased acquireth might._


Hail to thee who art in the midst of thine Ark, Oh rising Sun who
risest, and declining(1.) one who declinest: at whose will millions
spring forth, as he turneth his face to the unborn generations of men:
Chepera in the middle of his Bark, who overthroweth Apepi.

Here are the children of Seb who overthrow the adversaries of Osiris and
destroy them from the Bark of Rā.

Horus cutteth off their heads in heaven when in the forms of winged
fowl, their hinder parts on earth when in the forms of quadrupeds or [in
the water] as fishes.

All fiends, male or female, the Osiris _N_ destroyeth them, whether
descending from heaven or coming forth upon the earth, or issuing out of
the water or travelling along with the Stars.

Thoth slaughtereth them, the Son of the Rock, proceeding from the place
of the Two Rocks.(2.)

The Osiris _N_ is dumb and deaf(3.) for the Strong one is Rā, the
puissant of stroke, the Almighty one, who washeth in their blood and
walloweth in their gore.

The Osiris _N_ destroyeth them from the Bark of his father Rā.

The Osiris _N_ is Horus: his mother Isis bringeth him forth, and
Nephthys nurseth him, as they did to Horus, who repelleth the dark ones
of Sutu: who, when they see the Crown fixed upon his brow, fall upon
their faces.

Osiris Unneferu is triumphant over his adversaries in heaven and on
earth, and in the cycle of each god and goddess.

_Said over a Hawk in a Boat, with the White Crown upon its head, and the
figure of Tmu, Shu, Tefnut, Seb, Nut, Osiris, Isis, Sutu,(4.) Nephthys,
painted yellowish green on a fresh papyrus placed in this Boat, together
with the figure of the Deceased, anointed with the Heknu oil. Let there
be offered to them incense burning and roast fowl. It is the adoration
of Rā, and his voyage, for it is granted to him to make his appearance
each day with Rā, whithersoever he journeyeth; and it is the Slaughter
of the adversaries of Rā; positively and undeviatingly for times
infinite._

                                 NOTES.

1. _Declining_ ⁂⁂. This word frequently occurs in contrast with
⁂⁂⁂. I understand the latter in all such cases to signify the
shining of the sun on his rising, and the former to signify the shining
of the sun in his afternoon course.

2. _The son of the Rock, proceeding from the place of the Two Rocks._
The only explanation I can think of is derived from the identification
(in chapter 62) of Thoth with the Nile, ⁂⁂⁂⁂. From this
point of view the god is both the son of the Rock and issues from the
place of the Double Rock, ⁂⁂⁂, or of the two Rocks, called in
the time of Herodotus Krophi and Mophi.

3. _Dumb and deaf_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂. It is strange that this meaning
of the passage has so long been misunderstood. The sense of the first
word has long been recognised, and ‘deaf’ is the meaning rightly
assigned to ⁂⁂ in Birch’s Dictionary. One instance like the
following (from _Unas_, 608) is sufficient to settle the
question--⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, “He is
not so deaf that he should not hear thy voice.”

That the subject of these attributes is the Osiris is seen by reference
to _At_, where instead of ‘the Osiris’ the deceased speaks in the first
person, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, “I am dumb, I am deaf.”

4. _Sutu._ This divine name occurs in the text of Amenhait in the reign
of Thothmes III. And I have noted another instance where the name is
written ⁂⁂⁂. Dr. Birch called the papyrus Miss
Brockelhurst’s. It cannot however be the _Ax_ of M. Naville, which does
not contain the chapter.

The disappearance of the god’s name from all other documents is a fatal
argument against their claims to high antiquity.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER CXXXV.

 _Another chapter recited when the Moon renews itself on the first day of
                               the month._


Osiris is enveloped in storm and rain: he is enveloped: but the fair
Horus lendeth succour daily, the Lord of high attributes  . . . (1.) he
driveth off the storm from the face of the Osiris _N_.

Behold him coming: he is Rā on his journey: he is the four gods who are
over the upper region.

The Osiris _N_ arriveth at his own time: and by means of his lines is
brought to the light of day.

_If this chapter be known he becometh a Chu of Might in the Netherworld;
he dieth not a second time, in the Netherworld; but he eateth by the
side of Osiris._

_If it be known upon earth he will become like Thoth, so as to be
worshipped by the living: he will not fall a victim to a king’s
wrath(2.) or to the fierce heat of Basit, but will be made to advance to
a most blissful old age._

                                 NOTES.

This chapter is not found in the papyri of the older period.

1. The words ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _Offerings of_ (or _to_) _the
Moment_ have the appearance of an interpolated rubrical direction. _See_
next note.

2. _A king’s wrath_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. ⁂⁂ in the cases of
gods and men is an impulse which cannot be stopped, but carries
everything before it.

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER CXXXVIA.

          _Chapter whereby one is conveyed in the Bark of Rā._


Lo the Light(1.) which riseth up in Cher-āba.(2.)

He is born, he of the strong cord,(3.) his cable(4.) is at an end, and
his rudder(5.) hath been taken in hand.

I poise the divine machinery(6.) by which I raise up the Bark to the
cord above head, by means of which I come forth into Heaven, and am
conveyed to Nut.

I am conveyed by it along with Rā. I am conveyed by it like the Kaf.(7.)

I stop the path at the Uārit of Nut, at the staircase where Seb and Nut
bewail their hearts.

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER CXXXVIB.

 _Chapter whereby one is conveyed in the Great Bark of Rā to pass through
                           the orbit of flame._


      O bright flame which art behind Rā, and dividest his Crown!
      The Bark of Rā feareth the storm.
      Ye[145] are bright and ye are exalted.

I come daily with Sek-hra(8.) from his exalted station, so that I may
witness the process of the Maāt(9.) and the lion-forms(10.) which belong
to them ... so that I may see them there.

We are rejoicing: their great ones are in jubilation, and their smaller
ones in bliss.

I make my way at the prow of the Bark of Rā, which lifteth me up like
his disk.

I shine like the Glorious ones, whom he hath enriched with his wealth,
holding fast like a Lord of Maāt.

Here is the Cycle of the gods, and the Kite of Osiris.

Grant ye that his father, the Lord of them, may judge in his behalf.

And so I poise for him the Balance, which is Maāt, and I raise it to
Tefnut that he may live.

Come, come, for the father is uttering the judgment of Maāt.

Oh thou who callest out at thine evening hours, grant that I may come
and bring to him the two jaws of Restau, and that I may bring to him the
books which are in the Annu and add up for him his hosts.

And so I have repulsed Apepi and healed the wounds he made.

Let me make my way through the midst of you.

I am the Great one among the gods, coming in the two Barks of the Lord
of Sau, the Figure of the great saluter, who hath made the Flame.

Let the fathers and their Apes make way for me, that I may enter the
Mount of Glory, and pass through where the Great ones are.

I see who is there in his Bark, and I pass through the orbit of Flame
which is behind the Lord of the Side-lock, over the serpents.

Let me pass: I am the powerful one, the Lord of the powerful.

I am the Sāhu, the Lord of Maāt, the creator of every Dawn,(11.)

Place me among the followers of Rā: place me as one who goeth round in
the Garden of Peace of Rā.

I am a god greater than thou art.

Let me be numbered in presence of the Divine Cycle when the offerings
are presented to me.

                                 NOTES.

The two chapters which are numbered by M. Naville as 136A and 136B are
represented in the later recensions by a single chapter, which has been
made out of them. There is very much obscurity in the ancient texts,
though the MSS. containing them are numerous, and the more recent
versions are quite as difficult to understand. We must be satisfied for
the present by a strict literal and grammatical translation, wherever
this amount of success is attainable. The royal sarcophagus 32 of the
British Museum gives the latest form of 136A.

1. _Light_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. A common noun signifying _lamp_, but
the determinative here shows that a heavenly body is meant. The sun is
here spoken of exactly in the same poetical way as when Antigone (879)
speaks of τόδε λαμπάδος ἱερὸν ὄμμα, or Virgil of the _Phœboea lampas_.

2. The later recension speaks of “the Lamp in Annu and the Hammemit in
Cherāba.” This reading is already found in a few of the Theban texts.
The royal sarcophagus 32 of the British Museum gives the important
variant ⁂⁂⁂ = ⁂⁂⁂⁂, whence it follows that ⁂
is phonetically = ⁂. The latter sign has only two known values
⁂⁂⁂ _āḥā_, and ⁂⁂⁂ _āba_. That the latter is the true
equivalent of ⁂ is certain, in consequence of the complementary
vowels ⁂, which commonly accompany that sign, whether in the word
signifying _battle_, or in the name of a place. It is _impossible_ that
⁂⁂⁂ a should be the right reading, and no one has a right to
convert ⁂ into a simple ⁂.

The well known word ⁂⁂, “strike,” takes the prothetic ⁂, and is
found under the form ⁂⁂⁂, in the name of one of the hours of
the night.[146] No fresh information is derived from the discovery by M.
Daressy of the same word under the form ⁂⁂⁂, that is
⁂⁂⁂, as it should be corrected if cited. To _strike_ and to
_fight_ are different words, though they may often be used synonymously,
and admit of being substituted one for the other.[147]

3. _He of the strong cord_, ⁂⁂. This is grammatically the subject
of the verb _is born_, and I consider it as a compound expression in
which the adjective precedes the substantive, as in longimanus. I
understand ⁂ as = ⁂⁂⁂ (see _Zeitsch._, 1868, p. 70, and
1870, p. 154, 155). In the later recessions (_e.g._, Todt. 136, and B.M.
32) it is omitted in this place, but not in the passage which follows.

4. _His cable_, ⁂⁂. See Bonomi, _Sarc._ 8 D. and _cf._ a passage
in the Pyramid Texts (_Pepi_ I, 413, _Merenrā_ 590) which refers to this
or a similar voyage. M. Maspero thus translates it:--“Fais amener à Pepi
ta barque sur laquelle naviguent tes purs et quand tu auras reçu ta
libation d’eau fraîche sur cette CUISSE DES INDESTRUCTIBLES (the Uārit
⁂⁂⁂ of the Circumpolar Stars), fais naviguer Pepi dans cette
barque avec ce cable d’étoffe verte et blanche par lequel l’Œil d’Hor
est remorqué,” &c. The Uārit, or _Leg_ (on which see Ch. 74, Note 1) of
Nut is mentioned at the end of this chapter.

5. _Rudder_ ⁂⁂⁂ or ⁂⁂⁂.

6. _Machinery_ ⁂⁂⁂. The word has disappeared from the later
texts and been replaced by various conjectural emendations of the
scribes.

7. _The Kaf_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂, one of the divinities in form of apes.
Etymologically the word signifies “the _hot_ one.”

8. _Seḳ-ḥra_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂ is the more common reading, but
⁂⁂⁂ also occurs and so does ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. I
cannot remember where I found ⁂⁂⁂⁂ (_P.S.B.A._ VI, 191)
which would identify this divinity with Thoth.

9. _The Maāt_, the series of phenomena occurring in strict conformity
with Law, that is with the laws of Nature.

10. _Lion forms_, ⁂ phonetically ⁂⁂, in most of the papyri.
Some of the words which follow are evidently in very corrupt condition.

11. _Every Dawn_, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

-----

Footnote 145:

  _Sic._

Footnote 146:

  To press the identity of ⁂ and ⁂⁂⁂ in the name of this
  hour is to forget that its variants would equally prove that
  ⁂⁂ = ⁂⁂ = ⁂⁂.

Footnote 147:

  See _P.S.B.A._ IX, p. 313, and two previous articles of mine there
  referred to. The corrections I have to make are the following:--I
  wrongly assumed that the _fish_ which in hieratic papyri crosses the
  foot of the sign ⁂ in the variants of ⁂ was the same fish as
  we find in the group ⁂⁂ = ⁂⁂⁂ = ⁂. The
  fishes are different. On referring to M. Naville’s _Festival Hall of
  Osorkon II_, pl. 18, pictures will be found of the ⁂⁂ and the
  ⁂⁂. The first of these is clearly the fish in ⁂⁂,
  _ḥem-reu_, and the corresponding sign in the variant is to be read
  ⁂, _ḥem_, in harmony with the other evidence produced by W. Max
  Müller (_Recueil_, vol. IX). The picture of it does not enable one to
  determine its species. The pictures at Bubastis of the ⁂⁂
  seem to indicate the _Synodontis_, but a picture found by Petrie
  (_Medum_, pl. 12) shows an immense fish which has been identified with
  the _Latus_ or _Perca_ _Nilotica_. This being of the Acanthopterygian
  family is of course a very formidable _warrior_, like our own small
  perch, which, as Mr. Ward says, “does not yield its life without
  endangering the person of its captor, for the formidable rows of
  spinous rays belonging to the first dorsal fin have wounded the hands
  of many an incautious angler.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XLII.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXXXVIIB.
  =Papyrus, Brit. Mus., No. 9900.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXXXIIIAX.
  =Papyrus, Brocklehurst II.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXXXVIIB.
  =Papyrus, Brit. Mus., No. 9900.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXXXVIA. =Papyrus, Leyden II.=
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XLIII.

                            BOOK OF THE DEAD

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXL. =Mus. du Louvre. No. III, 52.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXXXVIII. =Papyrus, Busca.=
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                           CHAPTER CXXXVIIA.

        _Chapter whereby a Light is kindled_(1.) _for a person._


Oh Light! let the Light be kindled for thy Ka, O Osiris Chentamenta. Let
the Light be kindled for the Night which followeth the Day: the Eye of
Horus which riseth at thy temple(2.): which riseth up(3.) over thee and
which gathereth upon thy brow; which granteth thee its protection and
overthroweth thine enemies.

Undefiledly (bis) and successfully (bis):

The light is kindled for Osiris Unnefer: with fresh vases and raiment
like the Dawn.

                  ------------------------------------




                           CHAPTER CXXXVIIB.

           _Chapter whereby a Light is kindled for a person._


The Eye of Horus cometh, the Light one: the Eye of Horus cometh, the
Glorious one.

Come thou, propitiously, shining like Rā from the Mount of Glory, and
putting an end to the opposition(4.) of Sutu.

The prescription(5.) of her(6.) who hath raised him up, and seized upon
the Light for him, and who putteth an end to the troubles against thee,
like the Mount of Glory.

                                 NOTES.

The two most ancient authorities for this chapter, as it is found in the
Turin _Todtenbuch_ and the late recension, are one of the four tablets
of the Museum of Marseilles, published by M. Naville (_Les quatre stèles
orientées du Musée de Marseille_), and the Berlin papyrus of Nechtuamon.
The chapter which M. Naville has published as 137A, in the first volume
of his own _Todtenbuch_, and which is taken from the papyrus of Nebseni,
is manifestly, I think, not the original text, but another edition very
considerably revised and enlarged. And, in imitation of the rubric of
ch. 64, it concludes with a veracious statement, that it was discovered
by Prince Hortatef in a secret chest in the temple of Unnut, and was
brought away by the royal carriages.

These texts are found among the texts preserved in the tomb of
Petamenemapt (see _Zeitschr._, 1883, Taf. 1), but with various
additions, and have been appropriated by the Ritual of Ammon, published
by Dr. O. von Lemm.

The solemn ceremony of Kindling the Light for the dead is repeatedly
mentioned in the Siut inscriptions of Hapit’efae.

1. _Kindle_ ⁂⁂⁂ conveys the same notion as
⁂⁂⁂⁂ in the title of 137B. The Ammon Ritual has
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _strike a Light_. Dr. von Lemm thinks
that by a play of words it is implied not only that a light but Sut is
struck.

2. _At thy temple_ ⁂⁂⁂ _Ba_ and _Marseilles_:
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _in Abydos, Aa_ and _Petamenemapt_.

3. _Riseth up_ ⁂, _Ba_, ⁂⁂ _Marseilles_;
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _Aa_, ⁂⁂ _Petamenemapt_.

4. _Opposition_ ⁂⁂⁂, where ⁂ is = ⁂ as in the Sallier
Calendar. The sense is made clear in the parallel passages
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. ⁂, if not an error of recent
transcribers, is a wrong reading for ⁂, which is very distinctly
written in the Nebseni papyrus.

5. _Prescription_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

6. _Her._ The Vignette in the Nebseni papyrus exhibits the goddess Apit,
in hippopotamus form, lighting the light. Over her are the words
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, “Apit, mistress of divine protections.”

                  ------------------------------------




                           CHAPTER CXXXVIII.

         _Chapter whereby one is enabled to enter into Abydos._


Oh all ye gods who are in Abydos, [each one and his](1.) divine circle
likewise in its entirety, who are coming with acclamation to meet me:
let me see my father Osiris: let me be held as one who cometh forth as
of his house(2.).

I am Horus, the Lord of Kamit, and the heir of Tesherit,(3.) which I
have also seized. I, the invincible one, whose eye is potent against his
adversaries: who avengeth his father, and is fierce at the drowning of
his mother;(4.) who smiteth his adversaries and putteth an end to
violence on their part....(5.).

Oh thou of the potent Lock, king of hosts, who art seized of the Two
Worlds; whose father’s house is seized(6.) [by him] in virtue of the
writs(7.); my balance is perfectly even, my voice is law, and I prevail
over all mine adversaries.(8.)

                                 NOTES.

1. [_Each one and his._] These words are necessary for the purpose
of bringing out the meaning of the text. Every god, it has already
been said, has his circle of associates. The feminine suffix ⁂
after ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ shows the concordance with
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, which, like other collective nouns, is of the
feminine gender.

2. The exact text here is doubtful, and the sense of ⁂⁂ depends
upon it. ⁂⁂ or ⁂⁂ is the well known title of a priestly
official, whose presence was required in the ritual of the dead. He is
sometimes in attendance upon royal personages. Here according to its
etymological sense the word might simply mean a relative.

3. _Kamit_ ⁂⁂⁂, the “Black Land” is Egypt; _Tesherit_
⁂⁂, the “Red Land,” is whatever lies beyond the limits of Egypt.

4. _The drowning of his mother_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.
_Drowning_ maybe too strong a word, but immersion at least is meant. We
are at present without any other reference to this incident in the
career of the goddess Isis.

5. Here occurs a word, ⁂⁂⁂ or ⁂⁂⁂ of doubtful
meaning. As the next word to it begins a sentence, it must be considered
as connected with the words preceding it. I am not satisfied that
“silently” or “causing silence” would be a grammatical solution of the
question.

6. Seized (throughout this chapter) in the juridical sense of _seisin_
or feudal possession.

7. _Writs_ ⁂⁂⁂, a reading of three early papyri, which has
disappeared in the later ones. The Turin _Todtenbuch_ has ⁂⁂⁂,
“with his two hands.”

8. Here the chapter ends in _Pi_, and even sooner in the later texts.
The three older papyri differ as to the words which immediately follow,
and are certainly corrupt and unintelligible.

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER CXXXIX.

                     Identical with CHAPTER CXXIII.


_This completes Sir P. Le Page Renouf’s translation of the Book of the
Dead, so far as he had prepared it for publication at the time of his
death._

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

                BY EDOUARD NAVILLE, _D.C.L._, _&c., &c._

                           INTRODUCTORY NOTE.

During the last days of his life, the lamented Sir Peter Le Page Renouf,
foreseeing that he would not be able to reach the goal he had been
striving to attain, the completion of his translation of the Book of the
Dead, expressed the wish that the writer of these lines should continue
and complete his work. I did not feel at liberty to go against the
desire of the eminent master, who had done me the honour to choose me as
his successor, and to leave unfinished a work which he had kept in view
all his life long, and which he considered to be the choicest fruit of
his Egyptological researches.

But I had hardly set myself to the task, when I realised the
difficulties which were in my way. It is never easy, even for a
translator, to put himself into the place of another, to enter fully
into his views, to reconstitute the conception he had formed of the book
he had to interpret. To these difficulties must be added, that I had
hardly any help with regard to that part of the book which Renouf has
not published himself. Renouf, like many eminent scholars, had his
learning chiefly in his head; his notes are very scanty, mere scraps
without any methodical order. There is not a line of written translation
left, beyond what he printed himself. Thus, for the translation of the
following chapters, I was entirely dependent on the part already
published, and I had constantly to refer to those chapters, in order to
know the sense which Renouf would have given to words and sentences I
came across in the course of my work.

I endeavoured as much as I could, to translate as Renouf would have
done. Whenever it was possible, I used his words or his readings, though
I did not always agree with them. I followed his choice of texts. He
generally took the oldest one he had, which he frequently found in my
edition. On the whole I tried to continue the work on the lines which
Renouf himself adopted. Thus it cannot be said absolutely that this
translation is my work; Egyptological scholars will soon recognize what
is mine, and the interpretations for which I am not responsible. I beg
the reader to look at my work in this light, and to remember that at
present any translation of the Book of the Dead is tentative and
provisional, and liable, with the progress in our knowledge of Egyptian,
to undergo considerable changes. Nevertheless, I hope that this joint
work will not compare too unfavourably with the part done by my
illustrious predecessor.

                                                    EDOUARD NAVILLE.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER CXL.

 _The book read on the last day of Mechir, when the Eye is full on the
                          last day of Mechir._


There rises a form which shines on the horizon. Atmu rises pouring out
his dew, and the bright one who shines in the sky. The abode of the
obelisk is in joy because of them, because they are complete. There are
shouts of joy in the sanctuary and loud cheering fills the Tuat. They
fall down before Atmu Harmachis. For His Majesty gave orders to the
cycle of his followers. His Majesty ordered to give praise to the Eye,
and behold, my flesh he gave it strength, and all my limbs are renewed,
as soon as the order came out of the mouth of Rā.

His glorious Eye rests on its place on His Majesty in this hour of the
night. When the fourth hour is accomplished, the world is joyous in the
last day of Mechir, for the Majesty of the Eye is in the presence of the
cycle of the gods, and His Majesty rises as from the beginning, with the
Eye on his head as Rā Atmu.

The(1.) eyes of Shu, Seb, Osiris, Suti, Horus, Menthu, Ptah, Raneheh,
Thoth, Chati, Nai, Eternity, Necht, Mert, the land, he who is born by
himself. After the computation of the eye has been made in the presence
of this god, and when it is full and completed, all these gods are
joyous on that day, they who were silent;(2.) and behold there is a
festival made to every god; and they say: hail to thee, praise from Rā,
the boatmen tow his boat, Apepi is struck down. Hail to thee, praise
from Rā who causes the form of Chepera to exist; hail to thee, praise
from Rā, there is joy in him, his enemies are conquered; hail to thee,
praise from Rā, who has repelled the chiefs of the sons of the
rebellion. Acclamation to thee and praise to Osiris _N_.

Said on an eye of pure lapis-lazuli or _mak_ stone, ornamented with
gold; an offering is made before it of all things good and holy, when Rā
puts it on (on his head) on the last day of Mechir; another one is made
of jasper, which a man will put on any of his limbs he likes. When this
chapter is read by one who is in the boat of Rā, he is towed like the
gods, he is like one of them, and he prescribes what is done to him in
the Netherworld.

When this chapter has been read to its end, this is the copy of the
order of offerings made when the Eye is full: four burning altars for
Rā, four for the Eye, and four for these gods; what there is on each of
them is: five good pointed white loaves; five pointed fruit cakes, five
baskets of pastry, one measure of incense, one of fruit and one of roast
meat.

                                 NOTES.

The ancient papyri do not contain this chapter. The translation is made
from the Turin _Todtenbuch_, supplemented and corrected from hieratic
papyri in Paris. Its real meaning is difficult to understand. It seems
that under symbolical expressions it refers to an astronomical
phenomenon, the renewal of the sun after the winter solstice. According
to the principle which I have adopted, to maintain my predecessor’s
interpretations, I translated ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ “the Eye is full”
(_cf._ Notes on ch. 125, p. 214). But as it seems evident that here the
two eyes of the sun are the two periods of his apparent course, the
decrease and the growth, I should translate “the period is
accomplished,” this period being that of the decrease after which the
sun enters its ascending course, or according to Egyptian ideas begins
again to grow. It is natural that the completing of the period should be
hailed with joy by Rā, since it is the final victory over his enemies,
which sets him free and allows him to rise again as at the beginning.
The sign of his triumph is that he puts the ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ on his
head, as we see in the vignette.

1. Why this list of gods comes here, it is difficult to understand. It
seems quite out of place. Their number varies according to the papyri.
In some of them, they are put after the text in vertical columns. I
presume they are the divinities often alluded to as _these gods_. They
are the witnesses of the scene of Rā rising with the Eye on his head.

2. I have adopted the reading of the Paris papyrus, III, 58,
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

The vignettes consist, in the Turin papyrus, of the deceased worshipping
a black Anubis lying down on a naos, and having on his back the sign
⁂. This god is the ⁂⁂ first mentioned. Behind him are the
⁂⁂⁂⁂, a human form with the Eye on its head, and Harmachis.
Several papyri have only the Eye and Harmachis.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XLIV.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

               CHAPTERS CXLI AND CXLII. =Berlin Mus., 2.=

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXLVI.
  =Leyden, No. II.=
]

[Illustration: CHAPTER CXL. LEPSIUS, Todtenbuch.]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXLVI.
  =Berlin Mus., No. 2.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXLVI.
  =Louvre, III, 1.=
]

[Illustration: CHAPTER CXLVI. =Leyden, No. VI.=]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XLV.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: CHAPTERS CXLI AND CXLII. =Leyden Museum, No. VII.=]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XLVI.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXLIII.
  LEPSIUS, Todtenbuch.
]

[Illustration: CHAPTER CXLVIII. =Louvre, III, 89.=]

[Illustration: CHAPTER CXLVIII. =Leyden Mus., No. 11.=]

[Illustration: CHAPTER CXLIV. =Brit. Mus., 9913.=]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CXLIV.
  =Brit. Mus. Pap. Brocklehurst II.=
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XLVII.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration: CHAPTER CXLVIII. =Papyrus of Ani.=]

[Illustration: CHAPTER CXLVIII. =British Museum. Papyrus 9900.=]

[Illustration: CHAPTER CXLVIII. =Louvre, III, 93.=]

[Illustration: CHAPTER CXLIV. =Louvre, III, 89.=]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                        CHAPTERS CXLI TO CXLIII.

_The book(1.) said by a man or his father or his son in the festival of
  the Amenta, and wherewith he acquires might(2.) with Rā, and with the
  gods when he is with them. Said on the day of the new moon, when
  offerings are made of bread, beer, oxen, geese, and burnt incense to_

  Osiris Chentamenta,
  Nu,
  Māāt,
  The boat of Rā,
  Tmu,
  The Cycle of the great gods,
  The Cycle of the small gods,
  Horus the lord of the double diadem,
  Shu,
  Tefnut,
  Seb,
  Nut,
  Isis,
  Nephthys,
  The house of the _ka_ of the inviolate god,(3.)
  The storm of the sky which raises the god,
  The hidden one in her dwelling,
  Chebt the mummified form of the god,
  The greatly beloved, with red hair,
  The abundant in life, the veiled one,
  Her whose name is powerful in her works,
  The bull of the cows,
  The divine force, the good one, the good rudder of the Northern sky,
  Him who goes round and piloteth the double earth, the good rudder of
    the Western sky,
  The shining one, who dwelleth in the house of the devouring monster,
    the good rudder of the Eastern sky,
  The inner one in the house of the red ones, the good rudder of the
    Southern sky,
  Emsta,
  Hapi,
  Tuamautef,
  Kebehsenuf,
  The Southern part of heaven,
  The Northern part of heaven,
  The Sektit boat,
  The Atit boat,
  Thoth,
  The gods of the South,
  The gods of the North,
  The gods of the West,
  The gods of the East,
  The sejant gods,(4.)
  The resting gods,
  The great house,
  The house of flame,
  The gods of the abodes,
  The gods of the horizon,
  The gods of the field,
  The gods of the houses,(5.)
  The gods of the thrones,
  The ways of the South,
  The ways of the North,
  The ways of the West,
  The ways of the East,
  The halls of the Tuat,
  The holds of the Tuat,
  The mysterious doors,
  The doorkeepers of the halls of the Tuat,
  Those with hidden faces, the guards of the roads,
  The guardians of those who are lamenting,
  The guardians of those whose faces are joyous,(6.)
  The burning ones who put the flame on the altar,
  The door openers who extinguish the flames in the Amenta,
  Osiris Unneferu,(7.)
  Osiris the living,
  Osiris the lord of life,
  Osiris the inviolate god,
  Osiris in Kau,
  Osiris Orion,
  Osiris Sep,
  Osiris in Tanenit,
  Osiris in the South,
  Osiris in the North,
  Osiris creator of millions of men,
  Osiris the spirit in the crouching figure (?),
  Osiris Ptah lord of life,
  Osiris in Restau,
  Osiris inside the mountain,
  Osiris in the water of Heliopolis,
  Osiris in Hesert,
  Osiris in Siut,
  Osiris in Net’eft,
  Osiris in the South,
  Osiris in Pu,
  Osiris in Neteru,
  Osiris in Lower Saïs,
  Osiris in Bak,
  Osiris in Sun (Syene),
  Osiris in Rohenen,
  Osiris in Aper,
  Osiris in Keftennu,
  Osiris Sokaris in Petshe,
  Osiris in his city,
  Osiris in Pesekro,
  Osiris in his abodes in the land of the North,
  Osiris in heaven,
  Osiris in his abodes in Restau,
  Osiris in Nest,
  Osiris in Atefur,
  Osiris Sokaris,
  Osiris the lord of eternity,
  Osiris the begetter,
  Osiris the lord of Heliopolis,
  Osiris in the monstrance,
  Osiris the lord of eternity,
  Osiris the prince,
  Osiris of the gate of judgment,
  Osiris in Restau,
  Osiris on his sand,
  Osiris in the hall of the cows,
  Osiris in Tanenit,
  Osiris in Netit,
  Osiris in Sati,
  Osiris in Beteshu,
  Osiris in Upper Saïs,
  Osiris in Tepu,
  Osiris in Shennu,
  Osiris in Henket,
  Osiris in the land of Sokaris,
  Osiris in Shau,
  Osiris in Faur,
  Osiris in Maāti,
  Osiris in Hena,
  Osiris the great god the everlasting.

                                 NOTES.

The old texts which we follow here, join in one chapter, 141, what in
the Turin _Todtenbuch_ is divided into two, 141, 142; 143 being merely
the vignettes which accompany them. This chapter is the first of a
series in which the deceased has to show his knowledge. His being
well-informed as to the names of the gods and of their sanctuaries, and
also of the doors through which he passes, the halls which he enters,
confers upon him certain privileges. Here the deceased has to recite the
names of the gods while offerings are made to them; the second part of
the chapter refers only to Osiris in all his forms, and in his numerous
sanctuaries, which have not all been identified. The old versions differ
only slightly in length, from one or two of the gods being omitted. The
translation follows mainly the Cairo papyrus, _Cc_, with a few variants
taken from other papyri, one of the best of which is the papyrus _Nu_ of
the British Museum (ed. Budge).

1. The title of the later texts is much longer: _the book wherewith the
Chuu acquire might, knowing the names of the gods of the Southern sky,
and of the Northern sky, of the gods of the Bounds, of the gods who are
the guides in the Tuat. If it is said by a man, to his father or to his
mother, in the festival of the Amenta, he acquires might with Rā, and
with the gods when he is with them. Spoken on the day of the new moon by
Osiris N when offerings are made to him of ... etc., and offerings are
made to Osiris under all his names by Osiris N._

2. See note 1 to ch. 133. I cannot quite agree with Renouf as to the
meaning of the word ⁂⁂⁂⁂. It seems to me that its sense is
not so much that of “making someone mighty,” as of “distinguishing him,
making him eminent” in the opinion of his god or his master, so that he
may become his lord’s favourite. I consider the meaning of
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ as similar to that of ⁂⁂.

3. The following names are those of the seven celestial cows which are
represented with the bull in chapter 148, together with the rudders of
the four cardinal points.

4. See ch. 130, note 5.

5. ⁂⁂⁂ _pertiu_, adjective form of the noun ⁂, “a house,”
the gods of the houses, contrasted with those of the fields. This word
shows that in the complete spelling of the word ⁂ the ⁂ has not
fallen off, as it probably was the case in the pronunciation, and in
composite names such as: ⁂⁂, פִּתֹם; ⁂⁂⁂, פִּי־בֶּסֶת.

6. I read here according to _Ld._
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. Instead of
⁂⁂⁂ _Lc._ writes ⁂⁂, and _Nu_ ⁂⁂, which does
not give any sense. ⁂⁂ might here be translated _companions_.

7. In the Turin _Todtenbuch_, ch. 142 begins here with this title:
_Chapter whereby the deceased acquireth might, whereby is given him to
go and to widen his steps, coming forth by day in all the forms he
likes, knowing the names of Osiris in all the places he likes to be._

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER CXLIV.

                    _The Chapter of the Arrival_(1.)


The first gate. He whose face is overturned, who has many attributes, is
the name of the occupant of the first gate. The adjuster, is the name of
the warden thereof, and he with the loud voice the name of the herald.

The second gate. He who raises his face, is the name of the occupant of
the second gate; he with the revolving face(2.) is the name of the
warden thereof; the consuming one is the name of the herald.

The third gate. He who eats his own filth, is the name of the occupant.
The watchful, is the name of the warden thereof, the curser is the name
of the herald.

The fourth gate. He who opposes garrulity, is the name of the occupant
of the fourth gate; the attentive one is the name of the warden thereof,
the great one who drives back the crocodile is the name of the herald.

The fifth gate. He who lives on worms, is the name of its occupant, the
consuming flame, is the name of the warden thereof, the horn which
strikes the furious, is the name of the herald.

The sixth gate. He who makes the loaves, with a thundering voice, is the
name of its occupant; he who shows his face, is the name of the warden
thereof, the stoneknife which belongs to the sky, is the name of the
herald.

The seventh gate. He who takes possession(3.) of their knives, is the
name of the occupant of the seventh gate; the high voice is the name of
the warden thereof, he who drives back the enemies is the name of the
herald.

O ye, these gates, who are the gates to Osiris, ye who guard their
gates, ye who herald the things of the world to Osiris every day. Osiris
_N._ knows you--he knows your names; for he is born in Restau, where all
the glory of the horizon was given him. _N._ receives the investiture in
Pu, like the purification of Osiris. _N._ receives the saying(4.) in
Restau, when he leads the gods on the horizon with the ministrant, the
protectors of Osiris. I am one of them in their leading. _N._ is the
glorious one, the lord of the glorious, a glorious one who performs the
rites. _N._ celebrates the festival of the first day of the month; he is
the herald in the fifteenth day of the month. O thou who revolvest. _N._
carries the sacred flame to the hand of Thoth in the night when he sails
through the sky as victor. _N._ passes on in peace, he navigates in the
boat of Rā. The attributes(5.) of _N._ are the attributes of the boat of
Rā. _N._ has a name greater than yours, mightier than you who are on the
roads of Maāt. _N._ hates what is corrupt. The attributes of _N._ are
the attributes of Horus, the firstborn of Rā, who accomplishes his will.
_N._ is not fettered, he is not driven away from the gates of Osiris.
_N._ is perfect, the lion god, the pure one who follows Osiris Khent
Amenta every day. His domains are in Sechet hotepu among those who know
the sacred rites, among those who perform the sacred rites to Osiris.
_N._ is on the side of Thoth, among those who bring offerings. Anubis
ordered to the bearers of offerings, that there should be offerings to
_N._ of his own, and that they should not be taken from him by those who
are in captivity. _N._ has come like Horus, when he adorns the horizon
of heaven _N._ directs the march of Rā towards the gates of the horizon;
therefore the gods rejoice in the presence of _N._ The divine scent(6.)
is upon Osiris, the god with the lock(7.) will not reach him; the
keepers of the gates will not be hostile to him. _N._ is the one whose
face is hidden inside the palace, in the sanctuary of the god, the lord
of Tuat. _N._ has reached it after Hathor. _N._ gathers his hosts; he
brings Maāt to Rā, he drives away the Mighty One, Apepi. _N._ pierces
the steel firmament(8.), and repels the raging storm; he gives life to
the seamen of Rā. _N._ carries offerings to the place where it (the
boat) is. _N._ causes that the boat gives him a successful voyage. _N._
marches, and when he reaches it, the face of _N._ is like the Great One,
and his back like the lofty one. _N._ is the lord of the mighty. _N._ is
well pleased on the horizon. _N._ is valiant; he strikes you down; you
wakers; he makes his way to your lord, Osiris.

This is on the copy which is in the books(9.). It is written in yellow
ink, on the sacred circle of gods in the boat of Rā(10.), where
offerings are made of victuals, geese, incense, in their presence, in
order to revive the deceased, to make him powerful among the gods, and
that he may not be repulsed nor driven back from the pylons of the Tuat.
If thou readest it to the statue of this deceased in their presence, it
causes him to have access to every hall of those which are in the books.

This is said at the entrance of every gate, of those which are in the
books, and to each of them an offering is made of the haunch, the head,
the heart, and the hoof of a red bull, and four vases of blood which
does not come from the heart, and scent vases, and sixteen pointed white
loaves, and eight round loaves, and eight _chenfu_ loaves, and eight
_hebennu_ loaves, eight casks of beer, eight vases of dry corn, four
tanks of earthenware filled with the milk of a white cow, fresh herbs,
fresh olive oil, green eye paint, antimony, odoriferous oils, and
burning incense. Said while putting on a clay seal twice.

After this copy has been read, if the fourth hour is going round in the
day, beware of what is threatening in the sky; but if thou hast read
this book without any human being seeing it, it will widen the steps of
the deceased in heaven or earth, and in the Tuat; because this book
exalts the deceased more than any ceremony performed to him, henceforth,
from this day undeviatingly for times infinite.

                                 NOTES.

This chapter is the first of a series of four (144-147), in which the
old versions differ considerably from the Turin text. 144 and 147 refer
to the ⁂⁂⁂, 145 and 146 to the ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

The word ⁂⁂⁂ has been translated in various ways. Brugsch
calls them “watch-towers, pylons,” Pierret “stations.” Maspero considers
them as the old “ergastules,” a kind of vaulted hall. Jéquier speaks of
them as “magazines,” but generally translates the word by “pylons.”
Renouf, in his introduction to the Papyrus of Ani, calls the
⁂⁂⁂ “gates,” and the ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ “pylons.” In
another place he says the ⁂⁂⁂⁂ is not a mere gate, but a
_hold_ or _keep_.

If we refer to the old texts where this chapter is mixed together with
chapter 146, we see that the ⁂⁂⁂ is a door, a gate, which has
to be passed in order to reach the ⁂⁂⁂⁂. Behind each
⁂⁂⁂ a ⁂⁂⁂⁂ is represented as a shrine close to
which is its god. And also in the book called ⁂⁂⁂, _the book
of what is in the Tuat_, we see that Rā has to go through the
⁂⁂⁂ and make a long navigation before he reaches the gods of
the Tuat.

144 and 147 are two different versions of the same chapter, and no old
papyrus has them both. It is the same with chapters 145 and 146.
Evidently before the Saitic period, for these chapters, as for the 15th,
there was no received text, and the writers had the choice between
various versions which the compilers of the Turin text collected
together. There are seven ⁂⁂⁂, and the deceased who
approaches them has to know three names; first, the ⁂⁂⁂⁂
⁂⁂⁂ whom Renouf calls _the porter_, evidently from his being
styled in chapter 147 ⁂⁂⁂⁂. But if we consider that in
some of the old papyri the name of the man is that of the gate itself,
⁂⁂⁂⁂ has to be translated _he who belongs to_, the
occupant, the inhabitant, a sense which does not disagree with the word
⁂⁂⁂⁂ since, according to Oriental customs, the master of
a house is generally met with at the door, at the entrance.

The _doorkeeper_, the _watcher_ (Budge), or the _warder_ (Renouf), is
the second person, ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _he who guards the
gate_. The third person ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, as the text says
reports to Osiris every day the things of the world, and I suppose also,
who is coming towards the gate. Renouf calls this person _the teller_. I
shall use the word _herald_, which I adopted previously.

In the six old texts which I collated, we find only the reciting of the
three names. The Papyrus of Nu in the British Museum alone contains the
allocution to the gates of the Turin text. It is therefore from the
Papyrus of Nu that this chapter has been translated. (Budge, _The Book
of the Dead_.)

1. The title is taken from Papyrus _Ax_. The Turin text calls this
chapter “_the chapter of knowing the occupants of the seven gates_.”

2. A flame, judging from the determinative ⁂.

3. ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ as we read in chapter 147.

4. ⁂⁂⁂_N._⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ lit. “receives the
saying.” I suppose it means receives the right or the privilege to say
the words which follow: “I am one of them.”

5. ⁂⁂⁂⁂ a word which has various meanings. Renouf
translates: “protection, safeguard, powers, attributes.” I believe in
many cases it corresponds to what we call “the nature,” and that it is
used as a periphrase instead of an abstract adjective, which does not
exist in Egyptian. The real sense of such an expression
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂
seems to be ‘such as he is, such am I, and such is Rā.’

6. I read with the Turin text ⁂⁂⁂⁂. The papyrus _Pb_,
which reproduces this sentence in an addition to 136A writes
⁂⁂⁂.

7. ⁂⁂⁂. ‘The god of the lock, or the curling god,’ another
name for ⁂⁂⁂ Apepi, an evil power which must be driven away.
Chapter 130, line 39, I should translate: ‘Osiris follows the path of Rā
in the morning, and drives away the curling god.’

8. ‘The steel firmament,’ ⁂⁂⁂⁂, generally mentioned in
connection with storms and bad weather, so that possibly we have to
consider here the colour of the metal, and translate ‘the dark sky, the
black sky.’

9. The books of Thoth, the divine writer.

10. Probably the name of the book or of the page which contains also the
catalogue of the offerings.

The vignettes of chapter 144 represent the gates, the warder, and the
herald; the occupant is not seen, as he is in the vignettes of chapter
147. There seems to be no definite order or rule in these figures, just
as in the names, which are not always attributed to the same member
(_cf._ Introd. to the _Todtenbuch_, p. 172).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XLVIII.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration: CHAPTERS CXLV AND CXLVI. =Papyrus of Ani.=]

[Illustration: CHAPTER CXLV. =Tomb of Menephtah Siphtah.=]

[Illustration: CHAPTER CXLVI. =Louvre, III, 93.=]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE XLIX.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration: CHAPTERS CXLIV AND CXLVII. =Papyrus of Ani.=]

[Illustration: CHAPTERS CXLIV AND CXLVII. =Papyrus, Gizeh Museum, No.
21.=]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                        CHAPTERS CXLV AND CXLVI.

  _The knowing of the pylons of the house of Osiris, in the Garden of
                                Aarru._


The first pylon(1.) (is named): the lady of trembling whose walls are
high, the lady of destruction, who directs the words which drive away
the storm, she who forces back the violent(2.) coming towards her. The
name of the doorkeeper is: the brave.

The second pylon (is named): the lady of heaven, mistress of the world,
the consuming one, the lady of mankind, who counts the human beings. The
name of the doorkeeper is: Meshept.

The third pylon: the lady of altars, rich in offerings, with whom all
the gods are gathered, on the day when they sail to Abydos. The name of
the doorkeeper is: the anointer.

The fourth pylon: she who holds the knives, the mistress of the world,
who destroys the enemies of the god whose heart is motionless, who gives
advice, who is free from impurity. The name of the doorkeeper is: the
bull.

The fifth pylon: the flame, the lady of the words of power(3.), who
gives joy to him who addresses his supplications to her, to whom no one
who is on earth(4.) will come near. The name of the doorkeeper is: he
who coerces the rebels.

The sixth pylon: the lady of light, who roars loud; whose length and
breadth are not known, and the like of whom never was found from the
beginning. There are serpents on her, the number of which is not known;
they were born before the god whose heart is motionless. The name of the
doorkeeper is, the consort.

The seventh pylon: the shroud which enwrappeth the dead; the monster who
seeks to hide the body. The name of the doorkeeper is: _Akesti_.

The eighth pylon: the burning flame whose fire is never quenched; she
who is provided with burning heat, who sends forth her hand, and
slaughters without mercy. Nobody goes near her for fear of being hurt.
The name of the doorkeeper is: he who protects his body.

The ninth pylon: the foremost, the Mighty One, the joyous who gives
birth to her lord; whose circumference is 350 measures(5.); she who
shines like southern emerald, who raises Besu, and encourages the dead,
she who provides her lord with offerings every day.

The tenth pylon: she with a loud voice; who shouts curses to those who
make supplications to her; the very brave, the dreadful, who does not
destroy what is within her. The name of the doorkeeper is: he who
embraces the great god.

The eleventh pylon: she who renews her knives, who consumes her enemies,
the mistress of all pylons, to whom acclamations are given in the
daytime and in the twilight. She will prepare the enwrapping of the
dead.

The twelfth pylon: she who addresses her world and destroys those who
come through the morning heat, the lady of brightness, who listens to
the words of her lord every day. She will prepare the enwrapping of the
dead.

The thirteenth pylon: Isis extends her two hands upon her; she lightens
the Nile in its hidden abode. She will prepare the enwrapping of the
dead.

The fourteenth pylon: the lady of fear, who dances on the impure, to
whom the _Haker_ festival is celebrated on the day of the hearing of
yells. She will prepare the enwrapping of the dead.

The fifteenth pylon: the evil one, with red hair and eyes, who comes out
at night, who binds her enemy all round, who puts her hands over the god
whose heart is motionless, in his hour (of danger), who goes and comes.
She will prepare the enwrapping of the dead.

The sixteenth pylon: the terrible, the lady of the morning dew, who
throws out(6.) her burning heat, and sprinkles her sparks of fire over
her enemies when she appears. She who creates (reveals?) the mysteries
of the earth. She will prepare the enwrapping of the dead.

The seventeenth pylon: she who revels in blood; Aahit, the lady of the
_uauai_ plants. She will prepare the enwrapping of the dead.

The eighteenth pylon: she who likes fire, who washes her knives, who
loves cutting heads, the welcome one, the lady of the palace, who slays
her enemies in the evening. She will prepare the enwrapping of the dead.

The nineteenth pylon: she who directs the morning light in her time, and
observes the midday heat, the lady of the books written by Thoth
himself. She will prepare the enwrapping of the dead.

The twentieth pylon: she who is within the cavern of her lord, who
covers her name, and hides what she creates, who takes possession of
hearts, which she swallows. She will prepare the enwrapping of the dead.

The twenty-first pylon: she who cuts the stone by her word, and
sacrifices him on whom fall her flames. She follows the hidden counsels.

                                 NOTES.

Chapters 145 and 146 are two versions of the same text. They are the
chapter of the arrival of the deceased to the ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ of
the house of Osiris. It is difficult to know what these
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ really are. Renouf translates the word by
_pylon_. At the same time he says they are not mere gates, but keeps
or holds. I shall use his word pylon; but the word which seems to me
to convey most exactly the meaning is a _cell_, since each of the
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ has an inhabitant. There are various versions of
these chapters. The oldest, No. 146, is found in several papyri, and
has been translated from _Lc._ (Leyden), the only one which has the
chapter complete. It consists of 21 paragraphs, each of which begins
with a sentence giving the names of the pylon. It is followed by that
of the ⁂⁂⁂⁂, which I translate, with Renouf, the
_porter_ or _doorkeeper_ though I should prefer, he who is within the
door, since the vignettes show that the so-called porter or doorkeeper
is the god who occupies the cell. There are 21 pylons, out of which
the papyri give us a certain number. Brugsch finds in their names
those of some of the hours of night or day; but the fact of their
being 21, absolutely precludes the idea of these pylons being the
hours.

The papyrus of _Nu_ in the British Museum gives a slightly different
version of this chapter 146. Each pylon is introduced by these words,
“said by Nu when he arrives at the first pylon: I have arrived, I know
thee, I know the name of the god who guardeth thee; the lady of
trembling, &c., is thy name, the name of the doorkeeper is the brave.”
The other version which constitutes chapter 145 shows that the god who
guardeth the pylon and the doorkeeper are the same person.

Chapter 145 is the same text which has been spun out a little more. We
have no older copy of it than the fragments in the tomb of Meneptah
Siphtah and queen Tauser, which give us only eleven pylons, with a very
incorrect text. As for the Turin text, it is so hopelessly corrupt,
especially in the most important part, the names, that I did not attempt
to translate it. Then chapter 145 is the text of Nu for 146 still more
developed. In the version of the royal tomb, each paragraph is called:
“The salutation of Osiris, the king, to the pylon: I know thee, I know
thy name, I know the name of the god who guardeth thee.” Then follow the
name of the pylon, and that of the god, and after having said them, the
deceased describes the purifications he goes through, the oils with
which he has been anointed, and the text ends with these words: pass on,
thou art pure.

It is curious that both in 145 and 146 there is a change at the pylon
No. 11. In our text, _Lc_, the name of the doorkeeper disappears, and
each time, after the name of the pylon, we find these words:
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.
In 145 the name of the doorkeeper is still mentioned, but this sentence
takes the place of the description of the purifications and ointments
which occurred in the previous paragraphs. I should translate these
words: _she will direct or prepare the enwrapping or clothing of the
dead_. I think that the dead is supposed to wear a different garment at
each pylon, which is provided to him by the pylon itself.

A still more detailed version of 145 is found in the Paris papyrus _Pg_,
of which we have only a very short fragment. At each pylon there is a
dialogue between the deceased and doorkeeper, who asks whether the
deceased has been purified, in what water, with what oil he has been
anointed, which garment he wears, which stick he holds in his hand.

Chapters 145 and 146 are among the most incorrect texts of the Book of
the Dead, and until we have new copies of the old versions, there will
always be a large measure of conjecture in any attempt to translate
them.

1. ⁂⁂⁂⁂. Being feminine, the name is that of a woman or a
goddess.

2. ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. One of the names of Hathor, the
consort of Thoth at Hermopolis (Mariette, _Dendérah_, II, pl. 27, 15).

3. ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. Renouf translates, “words of power.” I
should prefer “magic power.”

4. I read with the Turin text ⁂⁂⁂.

5. ⁂. According to Lepsius, the σχοινιον, 40 cubits.

6. I read with the text of chapter 145 in the royal tomb
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

The vignettes vary considerably, according to the papyri. In _Lc_ all
the pylons are alike, with a god sitting inside; evidently the artist
was free to draw them according to his fancy. The vignettes of the
papyrus of Ani, and, still more, _Pc_, are remarkable for their fine
colours.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE L.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration: CHAPTER CXLVII. =Papyrus, Leyden, No. VI.=]

[Illustration: CHAPTER CXLVII. =Louvre, III, 8-9.=]

[Illustration: CHAPTERS CXLIV AND CXLVII. =British Museum. Papyrus No.
9900.=]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE LI.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration: CHAPTER CXLVIII. =Papyrus, Berlin Museum, No. 2.=]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER CXLVII.


The first gate. The name of the doorkeeper is: he whose face is
overturned, who has many attributes. The name of its warder is: the
adjuster. The name of the herald is: he with a loud voice.

Said by _N_ when he approaches the first gate.

I am the mighty one, who createth his own light.(1.)

I come to thee, Osiris, and I worship thee.

Pure are thine effluxes, which flow from thee, and which make thy name
in Restau(2.) when it hath passed there.

Hail to thee, Osiris.

Arise, thou art mighty, Osiris, in Abydos.

Thou goest round the sky, thou sailest with Rā, thou surveyest mankind,
thou art alone going round with Rā, for thou art called Osiris.

I am the divine mummy. What I say takes place.

I shall not be driven back from it (the gate); its walls of burning
coals show the way in Restau. I have soothed the pain of Osiris, when he
supports him who balances his pedestal, when he arrives from the great
valley. I have made my way to the light of Osiris.(3.)

The second gate. The name of the doorkeeper is: he who shows his face.
The name of its warder is: he with a revolving face. The name of the
herald is: the consumer.

Said by _N_ when he approaches the second gate. He sitteth and acts in
accordance with the desire of his heart, weighing the words as the
second of Thoth. The attributes of _N_ are those of Thoth. When faint
the Maāt gods, the hidden ones who live on truth, whose years are those
of Osiris, (still) I am mighty in offerings at the appointed time. I
have made my way out of the fire. I march, I have made my way. Grant
that I may pass on freely, that I may see Rā among those who give
offerings.

The third gate. The name of the doorkeeper is: he who eateth his own
filth. The name of its warder is: the watchful. The name of the herald
is: the great one.

Said by _N_ when he approaches the third gate.

I am he whose stream is secret, who judgeth the Rehui. I have come to
remove all evil from Osiris.

I am the girdled(4.) at his appointed time, coming forth with the double
crown.

I secured firmly my suit in Abydos, and I opened my path in Restau. I
have soothed the pain of Osiris who balances his pedestal. I have made
my way when he shines at Restau.

The fourth gate. The name of the doorkeeper is: he who opposes
garrulity. The name of its warder is: the attentive one. The name of the
herald is: he who drives back the crocodile.

Said by _N_ when he approaches the fourth gate.

I am the bull,(5.) the son of the Kite of Osiris. Behold, his father the
Fiery One sat in judgment. I poised the balance for him. Life has been
brought to me. I live for ever. I have made my way. I am the son of
Osiris, I live for ever.

The fifth gate. The name of the doorkeeper is: he who lives on worms.
The name of the warder is: the consuming flame. The name of the herald
is: the bow which strikes the furious (?).

Said by _N_ when he approaches the fifth gate.

I have brought the two jaws of Restau.(6.) I have brought to thee the
books (?) which are in the Annu, and I add up for him his hosts. I have
repulsed Apepi and healed the wounds he made. I made my way through the
midst of you. I am the great one among the gods. I purified Osiris. I
restored him as victor. I joined his bones, and put together his limbs.

The sixth gate. The name of the doorkeeper is: he who makes the loaves,
with a thundering voice. The name of its warder is: he who shows his
face. The name of the herald is: the stolen knife which belongs to the
sky.

Said by _N_ when he approaches the sixth gate.

I come every day, I go. I who was created by Anubis, I am the lord of
the diadem. I ignore the magic words (however). I avenge Maāt, I avenge
his eye. I gave his eye to Osiris himself. I have made my way. _N_ goes
along with you.

The seventh gate. The name of the doorkeeper is: he who takes possession
of their knives. The name of its warder is: he with a high voice. The
name of the herald: he who drives back the enemies.

Said by _N_ when he approaches the seventh gate.

I have come to thee, Osiris,(7.) pure are thine effluxes. Thou goest
round and thou seest the sky with Rā. Thou seest mankind, thou the only
one. Thou addressest Rā in the Sektit boat of the sky, when he goes
round the horizon. I say what I wish, my mummy is mighty. What I say
takes place like what he says. I shall not be driven back from thee. I
have made my way.

Said near the seven gates.(8.) When the deceased arrives at the pylons,
he is not driven back, nor repulsed from Osiris. It is given him to be
among the glorious ones, the most excellent of them, so that he may have
dominion over the first followers of Osiris.

Every deceased to whom this chapter is read is like the lord of
eternity, he is of one substance with Osiris, and in no place has he to
encounter a great fight.

                                 NOTES.

Chapter 147 is very like 144, in fact, it is the same more developed. It
refers also to the seven gates; and whenever the deceased approaches one
of the gates, he has to say the name of the doorkeeper, which, as we saw
before, is that of the gate itself; and also the name of the warder and
that of the herald. Besides the deceased has to address the gate,
probably in order to open it so that he may pass through. The words he
utters are found in chapters 117, 119 and 136B. The two first have
nearly the same title, _the arrival at Restau_, near Abydos. If, as is
most probable, the various parts of the Book of the Dead did not
originate in the same place, we may safely assert that these chapters,
as well as those of the gates and the pylons, come from Abydos.

On the whole the Papyrus of Ani is more complete for chapter 147 than
the Leyden text _Lc_ which is published in my edition. Therefore this
chapter has been translated from Ani, using _Lc_ whenever Ani is too
corrupt.

1. Chapter 119, _vide_ p. 206, “Chapter whereby one entereth and goeth
forth from Restau.”

2. I should translate: _which give to Restau its name_. This is an
instance of those wonderful etymologies often met with in religious
texts. From the word ⁂⁂⁂⁂ _to flow_, is derived the name
⁂⁂⁂.

3. The Osiris of the first gate whom the deceased addresses seems to be
the moon. The word ⁂⁂ is often used in speaking of the pale and
silvery light of the moon (Naville, _Litanie du soleil_, p. 54).

The last sentences are found in chapter 117, line 3.

4. Chapter 117.

5. Chapter 136B, line 14.

6. Chapter 136B, line 18. I repeat Renouf’s translation, though I differ
from him in various points. For instance, I should translate: _I have
closed the doors in Restau_ (_cf._ Inscr. of Piankhi, line 104).

7. An abridged version of chapter 119.

8. The rubric is taken from the Paris papyrus _Pc_.

There also the vignettes vary considerably according to the fancy of the
artist. In _Lc_ the gates and the gods are all alike. In _Pc_ the god is
always represented in human form with a ram’s head. In the Papyrus of
Ani, where there are three figures for each gate, these figures are all
different.

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER CXLVIII.

    _Giving sustenance_(1.) _to the deceased in the Netherworld, and
               delivering him from all evil things._(2.)

Hail to thee who shinest as living soul, and who appearest on the
horizon, _N._ who is in the boat knows thee; he knows thy name, he knows
the names of the seven cows and of their bull; they give bread and drink
to the glorified soul. You who give sustenance to the inhabitants of the
West, give bread and drink to the soul of _N._, grant that he may be
your follower, and be between your thighs(3.).

(Then follow the names of the seven cows.)

The house of the ka, of the inviolate god,

The storm of the sky, which raises the gods,

The hidden one in her dwelling,

Chebt the mummified form of the god,

The greatly beloved, with red hair,

The abundant in life, the veiled one,

She who is powerful in her works, or on her pedestal,

The bull ... of the Netherworld.

(Then the deceased calls on the four rudders of the sky, the four
cardinal points.)

Hail! divine form, the good one, the good rudder of the Northern sky.

Hail! thou who goest round and pilotest the double earth, the good
rudder of the Western sky.

Hail! the shining one, who dwellest in the house of the devouring
monsters, the good rudder of the Eastern sky.

Hail! the inner one who dwelleth in the house of the red ones, the good
rudder of the Southern sky.

Give bread and drink, oxen, geese, all things good and pure to _N._ Give
him sustenance, give him joy, may he rest on the earth, and may he be
victorious on the horizon of Annu, in the Tuat, in the sky, and on the
earth, eternally.

Ye fathers and mothers, gods of the sky, and of the Netherworld, deliver
_N._ from all things pernicious and evil, from all harm and evil, from
the cruel huntsman and his swords, and from all evil things; and order
what is to be done to him by the men, the glorious ones, and the dead,
in this day, in this night, in this month, and in this year.

Said(4.) by a man, when Rā is put before these gods, painted in green,
and standing on a wooden board, and when they give him the offerings,
and the sustenance which is before them, bread and drink, geese, and
frankincense, and when they present mortuary gifts to the deceased
before Rā.

(The book called) giving sustenance to a deceased in the Netherworld,
delivers a man from all evil things. Thou shalt not read to any other
man than thyself the book of Unnefer. He to whom this has been read, Rā
is his steersman and his protecting power, he will not be attacked by
his enemies in the Netherworld, in the sky, on the earth, and in every
place he goes, for (the book) giving sustenance to the deceased has its
effect regularly.

                                 NOTES.

This chapter in the Turin text begins with a long title which is found
by itself in the papyrus of _Nu_. Dr. Budge considers it as a special
chapter, to which he has given No. 190. But the proof that it is not a
chapter, is that the whole of it is written in red, which means that it
is a title; besides this title is that of one of the hymns which
constitute chapter 15, the hymn to the setting sun (15 B, 3). The
chapter itself begins with the last word in line 7 of the Turin text. We
have a nearly complete version of it in the tomb of Senmut, the
architect of queen Hatshepsu. The text from which I translate is
compiled from several Theban papyri.

1. Renouf translates the word in various ways: “sustenance, nutriment,
dainties, delicacies.”

2. Note the connection between these two ideas which occurs throughout
the chapter: the giving nourishment to the deceased delivers him from
all evil.

3. To be suckled by the divine cows, like Hatshepsu at Der el Bahari, by
Hathor.

4. Several papyri have here the rubric of 30B, with the name of
Mycerinus. The rubric which is here translated is taken from the papyrus
of _Nu_. Lepsius calls 148C the vignettes belonging to this chapter. In
a columned hall stands Osiris, and behind him the cows, the rudders, and
the four gods of the cardinal points. Osiris is sometimes left out. In
the papyrus of Ani the god has his hair painted green, and he stands on
a green basement.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE LII.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration: CHAPTER CXLIX. =British Museum. Papyrus 9900.=]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE LIII.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration: CHAPTERS CXLV AND CXLVI. =British Museum. Papyrus 9900.=]

[Illustration: CHAPTER CL. =British Museum, 9900.=]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER CXLIX.


The first domain. O this domain of the Amenta, where they live upon
bread of the plant _tep seru_. Take off your head dress in my presence,
for I am the great one among you, he who joins his bones and establishes
firmly his limbs. Ahi, the lord of hearts, came to me, he joined my
bones, and as he fixed the diadem of Tmu, he fastened on me the head of
Nehebkau, and established my balance. I am lord among the gods, I am
Amsi the builder.

The second domain.(1.) I am the great proprietor in the garden of Aarru.
O this garden of Aarru, the walls of which are of steel; the height of
its wheat is seven cubits, the ears are two cubits, and the stalks five
cubits. The glorified ones, each of whom is seven cubits in height, reap
them in presence of Harmachis.

I know the inner gate of the garden of Aarru, out of which cometh Rā, in
the East of the sky; the South of it is by the lake of Cha-ru, and the
North of it by the stream of Reu; thence Rā saileth with favouring
gales.

I am the Teller in the divine ship; I am the unresting navigator in the
Bark of Rā.

I know those two sycamores of emerald, between which Rā cometh forth, as
he advanceth over what Tmu hath lifted up (the firmament) to the Eastern
gates of the sky, through which he proceedeth.

I know this garden of Aarru of Rā, the height of its wheat is seven
cubits, the ears are two cubits, the stalks five cubits; the barley is
seven cubits. It is the glorified ones, each of whom is nine cubits in
height, who reap them in presence of the powers of the East.

The third domain.(2.) O this domain of the glorious ones through which
nobody can sail, which contains glorious ones, and the flame of which is
a consuming fire. O this domain of the glorious ones, your faces are
looking down; make straight your ways, and purify your abodes as it was
ordered to you by Osiris the eternal one.

I am the lord of the red crown which is on the head of the shining
one,(3.) he who gives life to mankind from the heat of his mouth, and
who delivers Rā from Apepi.

The fourth domain. O this great and lofty mountain of the Netherworld,
on the highest point of which ends the sky. It is three hundred measures
in length, and ten in width. There is a snake on it, he with sharp
knives is his name, he is seventy cubits in his windings, he lives by
slaughtering the glorious ones and the damned in the Netherworld.

I stand on thy wall,(4.) directing my navigation. I see the way towards
thee. I gather myself together. I am the man who puts a veil on thy
head, and I am uninjured. I am the great magician; thy eyes have been
given me, and I am glorified through them. Who is he who goeth on his
belly? Thy strength is on thy mountain; behold, I march towards it, and
thy strength is in my hand. I am he who lifts the strength. I have come
and I have taken away the serpents(5.) of Rā, when he rests with me at
eventide.

I go round the sky, thou art in thy valley, as was ordered to thee
before.

The fifth domain. O this domain of the glorious ones, which is open to
no one. The glorious ones who are in it have thighs of seven cubits, and
they live on the shades of the motionless.

Open to me the ways, that I may appear before you, that I may reach the
good Amenta, as was ordered me by Osiris, the glorious one, the lord of
all the glorified.

I live of your glory, I observe the first day of the month, and the
half-month on the fifteenth day.

I have gone round with the eye of Horus in my power, following Thoth.

Any god, or damned, who opens his devouring mouth against me on this
day, is struck down on the block.

The sixth domain. O thou Amemhet who art sacred more than the hidden
gods and the glorious ones, and who art dreadful to the gods. The god in
it is called Sechez-at.(6.)

Hail to thee, Amemhet. I have come to see the gods within thee.

Show your faces, and take away your head-dresses in my presence, I have
come to make your bread.

Sechez-at will not be stronger than I; the slaughterers will not come
behind me, the impure ones will not come behind me.

I live upon your offerings.

The seventh domain. O this Ases, too remote to be seen; the heat of
which is that of blazing fire. There is a serpent in it whose name is
Rerek. His backbone is seven cubits, he lives on glorious ones,
destroying their glory.

Get thee behind me, Rerek, who is in Ases, who bites with his mouth; and
who paralyses with his eyes.

Thy teeth are torn away, thy venom is powerless.

Thou shalt not come towards me, thy venom will not penetrate into me.
Thy poison is fallen and thrown down, and thy lips are in a hole.

The white serpent has struck his _ka_, and his _ka_ has struck the white
serpent.(7.)

I shall be protected. His head was cut off by the lynx.(8.)

The eighth domain. O this Hahotep, the very great, the stream of which
nobody takes the water for fear of its roaring.

The god whose name is the lofty one, keeps watch over it, in order that
nobody may come near it.

I(9.) am the vulture which is on the stream without end. I brought the
things of the world to Tmu, at the time when the sailors (of Rā) are
abundantly provided.

I have given my strength to the lords of the shrines, and the awe I
inspire to the lord of all things.

I shall not be taken to the block. The pleasure they take in me will not
be destroyed. I am the guide on the northern horizon.

The ninth domain.(10.) O this Akset which art hidden to the gods, the
name of which the glorious ones are afraid to know. No one goes out who
goes into it, except this venerable god, who inspires fear to the gods
and terror to the glorious ones. Its opening is of fire, its wind
destroys the nostrils. He made it such(11.) for his followers in order
that they may not breathe its wind, except this venerable god who comes
out of his egg.

He made it such, being in it, in order that nobody may come near it,
except Rā who is supreme in his attributes.

Hail to thee, venerable god, who comes out of his egg. I have come to
thee to be in thy following. I go out of, and I come into Akset. Open to
me the doors, that I may inhale its wind, and that I may take the
offerings within it.

The tenth domain.(12.) O this city of the Kahu gods who take hold of the
glorious ones, and who gain mastery over the shades(13.).... Who they
see with their eyes; who have no connection with the earth.

O ye who are in your domain, throw yourselves on your bellies, that I
may pass near you. My glorious nature will not be taken from me. No one
will give mastery over my shade, for I am the divine hawk who has been
rubbed with _anti_ and anointed with incense; libations have been
offered to me; Isis is before me; Nephthys is behind me.

The way has been pointed to me by Nau, the bull of Nut and Nehebkau. I
have come to you, ye gods; deliver me and glorify me of an eternal
glory.

The eleventh domain. O this city in the Netherworld, this cavity which
masters the glorious ones.

No one goes out, of those who went into it, from the dread of the
appearance of him who is in it.

He who sees the god who is in it, face to face, he who sees him dies
there from his blows, except the gods who are there, and who are hidden
to the glorious ones.

O this Atu, in the Netherworld. Grant that I may reach them; I am the
great magician, with his knife; I am issued of Set, (I stand on) my feet
for ever.

I rise, and I am mighty through this eye of Horus; my heart is raised,
after it has fallen low.

I am glorious in heaven, and I am mighty on earth.

I fly like Horus, I cackle like the divine goose.

It was given me to alight near the stream of the lake; I stand near it,
I sit near it, I eat of the food in Sechit Hotepit, I go down to the
islands of the wandering stars.

The doors of the Maāti are open to me; and the gates of the upper waters
are unbolted to me.

I raise my ladder up to the sky to see the gods.

I am one of them, I speak like the divine goose, and I listen to the
gods.

I talk aloud, I repeat the words of Sothis.

The twelfth domain. O this domain of Unt, within Restau, the heat of
which is that of fire. No god goes down into it, and the glorious ones
do not gather into it, for the four snakes would destroy their
names.(14.)

O this domain of Unt! I am the great among the glorious ones within. I
am among the wandering stars. I am not destroyed; my name is not
destroyed.

Come, thou divine scent, say the gods who are in the domain of Unt.

I am with you, I live with you, ye gods who are within the domain of
Unt.

You love me more than your gods. I am with you for ever, in the presence
of the followers of the great god.

The thirteenth domain. O this domain of the water, which none of the
glorious ones can possess, for its water is of fire, its stream is
burning, and its heat is of blazing flame, so that they may not drink
its water in order to quench the thirst which is within them, for their
mighty fear, and their great terror.

The gods and the glorious ones look at its water from afar, they do not
quench their thirst, and their heart is not set at rest, because they
may not go near it.

When the river is full and green like the flowing sap which comes out of
Osiris, I take its water, I draw from its flood like the great god who
is in the domain of the water, and who keeps watch over it for fear that
the gods may drink from its water, and who inspires dread to the
glorious ones.

Hail to thee, thou great god, who art in the domain of the water. I have
come to thee. Grant me to take of thy water, to take of thy stream, as
thou doest to this great god.

When the Nile will come, when he will give birth to the plants, and
cause the herbs to grow; as it is given to the gods, when he appears in
peace, grant that the Nile may come to me, and that I may take his
plants; for I am thy own son for ever.

The fourteenth domain. O this domain of Cher-āba(15.), which drives the
Nile towards Tattu, and which causes the Nile to go and spend its corn
in his course from _Rokekmu_(16.); thou which presentest offerings to
the dead, and mortuary gifts to the glorious ones.

There is a serpent belonging to it, who comes from the two wells at
Elephantine, at the gate of the water. He goes with the water, and stops
at the stream of Cher-āba, near the powers of the high flood; he sees
his hour of the silent evening.

Ye gods who live in the water of Cher-āba, ye powers of the high flood,
open to me your ponds, open to me your lakes, that I may take of your
water, and that I may rest in your stream, that I may eat of your corn,
that I may be satisfied with your food.

I have risen, my heart is high, for I am the great god in Cher-āba.

Make me offerings. I have been filled with the vital sap coming out of
Osiris. I shall not be despoiled of it. The end.

                                 NOTES.

This is one of the interesting chapters of the Book of the Dead. It is
more frequently met with than the other ones, and it generally
constitutes the end of the Theban papyri. It is the chapter of the
various domains which the deceased has to reach, and in which he enjoys
special privileges.

The vignettes generally give the plan of the domain, and very often the
colour with which it is painted; they are either green ⁂⁂⁂ or
light yellow ⁂⁂⁂. In most of the papyri there are only four
yellow--3, 9, 10, and 14.

Renouf translates ⁂⁂⁂ “domain” (p. 208). Dr. Budge keeps the
word _aat_, and considers them as the divisions of the Elysian fields.
Pierret translates _demeure_, Brugsch _siège_, _demeure_, _habitation_.
I shall adopt Renouf’s word, though _residence_ or _habitation_ seems to
me preferable. An ⁂⁂⁂ is an enclosed space which has
inhabitants described or mentioned in the text. The deceased calls first
on the domain, and often in the same breath goes over to the inhabitants
without any transition.

1. The second domain is the horizon. The text of the vignette says: the
god who is in it is Harmachis. The text to this domain being a
repetition of chapter 109, I adopt Renouf’s translation (p. 181.)

2. The third domain is called “that of the glorious ones.”

3. The moon. _Ab_ reads: ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂
“on the face of the sun, and on the face of the moon.”

4. The deceased speaks of himself as a magician who can cover the head
of the serpent without being hurt. The eyes of the serpent, which have
the power of paralyzing, of making impotent (see seventh domain), are
given him; the result is, that when he goes to the mountain on which the
serpent shows his strength, this strength collapses, as the deceased
says: thy strength is in my hand; I am he who lifts, who takes away the
strength.

5. Renouf generally translates ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ tunnels. See p. 126,
and Proc., 1893, p. 385; but here we must adopt the other sense, serpent
or worms. Copt. ⲁⲕⲟⲣⲓ.]

6. Or _Secher-remu_, he who knocks down the worm, or he who knocks down
the fishes.1

7. _Ka_ and serpent have killed each other.

8. The lynx (see note, p. 82, on chapter 34). It seems to be the cat who
is represented in the vignettes of chapter 17, cutting off the head of
the serpent.

9. This is a chapter found on the sarcophagus of Amam in the British
Museum; it has the title ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, “taking the
form of a vulture” (see p. 139): I should rather say a goose.

10. The ninth domain, Akset or Aksi, has the form of a vase, which a
crocodile called Maatetf touches with his snout.

11. The words are obscure. I believe them to mean: Akset was made such
as it is, in order that, &c.

12. The tenth domain is called that which is at the mouth of the stream.

13. I cannot translate the following words.

14. The destruction of the name means absolute destruction of the
person.

15. I have kept the reading Cher-āba, which Renouf advocates, in
opposition to Cher-aha, adopted by most egyptologists.

16. I believe this name, which is spelt differently in each papyrus, to
be the origin of the Κρῶφι and Μῶφι, these two rocks mentioned by
Herodotus (II, 28), out of which issues the Niles.

There are hardly any variants in the vignettes which accompany the text
of the chapter of the domains.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE LIV.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration: CHAPTER 151. =Papyrus, British Museum, 10010.=]

[Illustration: CHAPTER 152. =Papyrus, Busca.=]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER 151A _ter._
  =Papyrus, B.M., 9900.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER 152.
  =Papyrus, Louvre, III, 93.=
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                  ------------------------------------

                              Chapter CL.


                                 NOTES.

This is not a separate chapter: it stands to 149 as 16 to 15. It
consists of the vignettes accompanying Chapter 149, and it is the end of
many papyri. Curiously, there are fifteen domains instead of fourteen,
one of them, the fifth, seems to have been divided into two.

At the corner of the picture are four serpents, which I consider as the
four cardinal points.

Taking the domains in the same order as in the preceding text, we find
them named in the following way in the papyrus _Aa_:--

1. The good Amenta, the gods within which live on _shens_ and _tu_
loaves.

2. The garden of Aarru; the god in it is Rā.

3. The domain of the glorious ones.

4. The high and lofty mountain.

5. The basin, the fire of which is a blazing flame; the front of the
fire, the god in it is the bearer of altars.

6. Amemhet, the god in it is he who knocks down the fishes.

7. Asset.

8. Hasert, the god in it is the bearer of heaven.

9. Akset, the god in it is Maatetf.

10. The face of the Kahu gods.

11. Aat, the god in it is Sothis.

12. The domain of Unt, the god in it is the destroyer of souls.

13. The surface of the water, the god in it is the mighty power.

14. The domain of Cher-āba, the god in it is the Nile.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER CLI.


(_a_) Words of Anubis.

Thy right eye is in the Sektit boat, thy left eye is in the Âtit boat.
Thy eyebrows are with(1.) Anubis, thy fingers are with Thoth, thy locks
are with Ptah Sokaris; they prepare for thee a good way, they smite for
thee the associates of Sut.

(_b_) Said by Isis. I have come as thy protector, _N._, with the breath
coming forth from Tmu. I shall strengthen for thee thy throat. I give
thee to be like a god. I will put all thy enemies under thy feet.

(_c_) Said by Nephthys. I go round my brother Osiris _N._ I have come as
thy protector. I am myself behind thee for ever, hearing when thou art
addressed by Rā, and when thou art justified by the gods. Arise, thou
art justified through all that has been done for thee. Ptah has smitten
thy enemies; thou art Horus the son of Hathor. It has been ordered what
should be done for thee. Thy head will not be taken away from thee for
ever.

(_d_) Words of the figure of the Northern wall.

He who cometh to enchain, I shall not let him enchain thee. He who
cometh to throw bonds, I shall not let him throw bonds on thee. I am
here to throw bonds on thee. I am here to enchain thee; but I am thy
protector.(2.)

(_e_) Words of the Tat of the Western wall.

Come in haste, and turn away the steps of _Kep-her_. Bring light into
his hidden abode. I am behind Tat, I am verily behind Tat, on the day
when the slaughter is repelled. I am the protector of _N._(3.)

(_f_) Words of the flame of the Southern wall.

I have spread sand around the hidden abode, repelling the aggressor that
I might throw light on the mountain. I have illuminated the mountain. I
have turned the direction of the sword. I am the protector of _N._(4.)

(_g_) Said by Anubis in his divine hall, the lord of Ta-Tsert. I keep
watch over thy head. Awake, thou on the mountain. Thy wrath is averted.
I have averted thy furious wrath. I am thy protector.(5.)

(_h_) The two figures of the soul, with raised hands.

The living soul, the powerful Chu of _N._ worships the sun when he
ariseth on the Eastern horizon of the sky.

The living soul of _N._ adoreth Rā, when he setteth in the land of the
living, on the Western horizon of the sky.

(_i_) Words of the two statuettes.(6.)

O statuette there! Should I be called and appointed to do any of the
labours that are done in the Netherworld, by a person according to his
abilities, to plant fields, to water the soil, to convey the sand from
East to West; here am I, whithersoever thou callest me.

Words of the genii of the four cardinal points.

(_k_) I am Kebehsenuf. I have come to be thy protector. I have joined
thy bones. I have strengthened thy limbs. I have brought thee thy heart
and put it in its place, into thy body. I will cause thy house to
prosper after thee.

(_l_) I am Hapi thy protector. I have revived thy head and thy limbs. I
have smitten thy enemies under thee. I give thee thy head for ever.

(_m_) I am Tuamautef. I am thy son Horus, I have come, and I rescue my
father from the evil doer, whom I put under thy feet.

(_n_) I am Emsta. I have come, I am thy protector. I cause thy house to
prosper permanently, according to the command of Ptah, according to the
command of Rā himself.

                                 NOTES.

With Chapter 151 begins a series of texts written either on the walls of
the funeral chamber or on the mummy cloth, or on various amulets. This
series goes as far as 160, with the exception of 152 and 153, which have
been inserted there without any apparent reason.

Chapter 151 is not so much a text as a picture. It represents the
funeral chamber. The four walls, which should be vertical, are drawn
lying flat on the ground. In the middle of the chamber, under a canopy,
is the mummy, on which Anubis lays his hands; under the bed is a bird
with a human head, the symbol of the soul of the deceased. We must
suppose that the god Anubis is a priest, or a member of the family, who
has put on a jackal’s head, and who pronounces the words said to be
those of the god. At the foot of the bed are the two goddesses Isis and
Nephthys.

Each of the four walls had a small niche of the exact size of an amulet,
which was lodged in it. We know it from the four oriented steles of
Marseilles (Naville, _Les quatre stèles orientées du Musée de
Marseille_), where we find the text belonging to each wall, and also the
niche cut in the stone for each amulet. On the North was a human figure,
on the South a flame, on the East a jackal, on the West a Tat.

In the chamber were four so-called canopic vases, with the gods of the
four cardinal points, each of whom has his words to say. Besides these
were statuettes called _shabti_ or _ushabti_, the helpers of the
deceased in his work in the Elysian fields. In the papyrus London, 10010
(_Af._), from which this chapter is translated, one of them has the
usual appearance, the other the head of Anubis.

The soul of the deceased is supposed to be in the chamber, and to
worship the rising and the setting sun.

Very few papyri have this chapter as complete as _Af._, which is taken
here as standard for text and vignettes, but there are fragments of it
here and there. The Turin version is much shorter than the old one. The
papyrus of _Nu_ (ed. Budge) contains the texts of the four walls with
rubrics very similar to those of the steles in Marseilles. They form a
special chapter joined to 137A, with the title: _What is done secretly
in the Tuat, the mysteries of the Tuat, the introduction into the
mysteries of the Netherworld._

In order to facilitate the understanding of the chapter, I have lettered
the words spoken by the various figures.

1. Renouf would have translated (see Chapter 42), thy eyebrows are
_those of_ Anubis; but the following chapter shows that we have to
translate _with_ Anubis, which should mean here, under the protection of
Anubis.

2. The rubrics say the figure is made of palm wood, and is seven fingers
high.

3. The rubric of this Tat is the following: _said on a Tat of crystal,
the branches of which are of gold. It is folded up in fine linen._

There is another chapter of the Tat put on the neck of the deceased
(Chapter 155), the words of which are totally different.

4. According to the rubric, the flame is a torch made of reeds
⁂⁂⁂⁂ (Loret).

5. The Anubis was made of clay.

6. Words engraved on the funerary statuettes called ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂
or ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, an abridged form of Chapter 6, for which I take
Renouf’s translation.

                  ------------------------------------




                          CHAPTER CLIA _bis_.


Said by Anubis Amut, in his divine hall, when he puts his hands over the
body of _N._, and provides him with all that belongs to him.

Hail to thee, beautiful face, lord of sight, sacred eye lifted up by
Ptah Sokaris, raised by Anubis, and to which Shu has given its stand.

Beautiful face, which art among the gods, thy right eye is in the Sektit
boat, thy left eye is in the Âtit boat; thy eyebrows are a pleasant
sight among the gods. Thy front is in the protection of Anubis, thy back
is pleasant to the venerable hawk. Thy fingers(1.) are well preserved in
writing before the lord of Hermopolis, Thoth, the giver of written
words. Thy locks are beautified before Ptah Sokaris.

_N._ is welcome among the gods; he sees the great god, he is led on the
good roads, he is presented with funerary offerings, his enemies are
beaten down under him in the house of the Prince of Heliopolis(2.).

                                 NOTES.

The words spoken by Anubis in Chapter 151 have been taken out and made
into a special chapter, which in papyrus London, 9900 (_Aa_) occurs in
two different forms. I called them CLIA _bis_ and CLIA _ter_, the second
one being only an abridgement of the first. Vignettes and titles are not
the same for these two chapters. That translated, CLIA _bis_, is the
longest of the two. The title of the other one is: the _Chapter of the
Mysterious Head_, and the vignette thereof consists of a mummy’s head.

In comparing this chapter with the words of Anubis we had before, we
find the explanation of expressions like this: thy eyebrows are with
Anubis.

1. ⁂. This word has always been translated _fingers_, a sense which
is evidently wrong in this place, where parts of the head only are
mentioned, and when one would expect the hair or the beard.

I suppose that this obscure sentence means that since everything in him
is divine the design or colour of his fingers (?) was taken from the
books of Thoth.

2. See note 8 on Chapter 1.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER CLII.

           _The Chapter of building a house_(1.) _on earth._


O rejoice, Seb, _N._ has been set in motion with his vital power ... he
has given to men and gods their creative strength.

There is cheering, when it is seen that Seshait(2.) has come towards
Seb; when Anubis has commanded to _N._: build a house on earth, the
foundations of which be like On, and the circuit like Cher-ābā; let the
god of the sanctuary be in the sanctuary. I also decree that it should
contain the sacrificial victim, brought by slaves, and held up by
ministrants.

Said by Osiris to the gods in his following: come hastily, and see the
house which has been built for the glorified, the well equipt, who
cometh every day. Look at him, hold him in awe, and give him praise,
which is well pleasing to him.

(3.)You see what I have done myself, I the great god who cometh every
day. Look ye, Osiris brings me cattle, the south wind brings me grain,
the north wind brings me barley as far as the end of the earth.

I have been exalted by the mouth of Osiris(4.), applause surrounds
him(5.) on his left and on his right.

Look ye, men, gods, and Chus, they applaud him, they applaud him, and I
am well pleased.

                                 NOTES.

The text here translated is that of the Papyrus of _Nu_, with a few
variants taken from contemporary texts.

1. The ⁂⁂ here mentioned is the abode of the ⁂, where it is
worshipped and receives offerings. In the vignette of Pap. Busca (Ik),
the plan of this abode is like the funerary constructions discovered at
Nagadah and Abydos.

2. The goddess ⁂ is often connected with building (Chapter 52).

3. Here the deceased begins to speak himself.

4. I translate ⁂⁂ the beating in measure as the musicians do, the
regular applause so often heard in the East.

5. The person changes, as is often the case in such texts. The deceased
speaks of himself in the third person.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE LV.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration: CHAPTER 153A. =Louvre, III, 93.=]

[Illustration: CHAPTER 153A. =Louvre, 3084.=]

[Illustration: CHAPTER 153A. =B.M., 9900.=]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER 161.
  =Louvre, III, 93.=
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER CLIIIA.

              _The Chapter of coming out of the net._(1.)


O he who turns backwards, mighty of heart, who spreads his net before
him, who entereth the earth! O you the fishermen sons of their
fathers(2.), who go round in the midst of the stream, you will not catch
me in your net, in which you catch the disabled, and you will not carry
me away in your canvas, in which you take away the evil ones in the
earth; the frame of which reaches the sky, and the weights of which are
on the earth.

For I will come out of its meshes and shine like Hunnu (Sokaris). I will
come out of its bars(3.) and shine like Sebak. I shall fly against you
like a fisher whose fingers(4.) are hidden.

I know the fork(5.) which belongs to it. It is the great finger of Hunnu
(Sokaris). I know the stake(6.); it is the leg of Nemu(7.). I know its
pointed head, it is the hand of Isis. I know the name of its blade; it
is the knife of Isis with which she cut the meat for Horus.

I know the name of the frame and of the weights. They are the feet and
the legs of the Sphinx(8.).

I know the name of the ropes with which fishing is done; they are the
bonds of Tmu.

I know the names of the fishermen who are fishing. They are the
worms(9.), the ancestors of the blood drinkers(10.), who pour their flow
on my hands, when the great god the lord listens to the words in
Heliopolis, in the night of the 15th of the month(11.), in the temple of
the moon.

I know the marked space(12.) in which they are enclosed. It is the soil
of iron on which the gods stand.

I know the name of the divine supervisor who takes hold of the fishes,
and marks them on the tail. He is the supervisor of the divine property.

I know the name of the table on which he lays them (the fishes); it is
the table of Horus.

He sits alone in the night; nobody sees him; the future ones(13.) see
him, and the present ones give him their acclamations.

I shine like Horus; I govern the land, and I go down to the land in the
two great boats. Horus introduces me into the house of the Prince(14.).

I have come as a fisher; the fork has been given into my hand; my blade
is in my hand, my knife is in my hand. I come forth; I go round about,
and I entangle in my net.

I know the name of the fork which closes the mouths vomiting (fire?). It
is the great finger of Osiris.

The fingers (prongs) which hold fast, they are the fingers of the
ancestors of Rā, the claw of the ancestor of Hathor.

I know the strings which are on this fork, they are the bonds of the
lord of mankind.

I know the name of the stake; the thigh of Nemu. Its point is the hand
of Isis, its coil, the cord of the first-born god, its cordage the rope
of Rā.

I know the name of the fishermen who are fishing; they are the worms,
the ancestors of Rā, the creatures(15.), the ancestors of Seb.

When what thou eatest is brought to thee, what I eat is brought to me.
Thou eatest what is eaten by Seb and Osiris.

O(16.) thou who turnest backwards, mighty of heart, who fishes and
entangles him who enters the earth; O you fishers, sons of their
fathers, and ye fowlers who are in Nefer-sent; you will not catch me in
your nets, and you will not entangle me in your meshes, wherein you
catch the disabled, and where you catch those who are in the earth; for
I know it (the net), its frame above, and its weights below. Behold, I
come, my stake is in my hand; the point is in my hand, the blade is in
my hand.

I come, I arrive to my ... (?) I have come myself; I have come to bind
it, to put it in its place. My knife is sharpened. I put it in its
place.

The stake which is in my hand is the thigh of Nemu; the fork which is in
my hand is the fingers of Sokaris; this point which is in my hand is the
claws of Isis; the blade which is in my hand is the knife of Nemu.

Behold I have come, I sit in the boat of Rā, I sail on the lake of
Cha(17.) and on the lake of the Northern sky.

I hear the words of the gods. I do what they are doing, I give praises
to their persons, I live as they live.

_N._ appears on the ladder which was made for him by his father Rā, when
Horus and Sut take hold of him.

                                 NOTES.

In the Theban version the Chapter of the Net is divided into two, 153A
and 153B, which have different titles and different vignettes. 153A is
called the “_Chapter of coming out_,” or, as might be translated, “_of
escaping from the net_.” The vignettes represent a clap-net, used for
waterfowl. The second Chapter is called “_the Chapter of escaping from
those who catch_ ⁂⁂⁂⁂,” which, from the etymology, might
be translated _foul_ or _fetid fish_. There the vignette represents a
drag-net containing fishes, and drawn by apes.

It is probable, one may suppose, that originally one Chapter referred to
the fowlers, the ⁂⁂⁂⁂, who use the clap-net, and the
other to the fishermen, the ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, who use the
drag-net. But in the form in which these Chapters appear in the three
best texts where they have been preserved, London, 9900 (_Aa_), Paris,
III, 93 (_Pb._), and the papyrus of _Nu_, fowlers and fishermen are
mixed together.

The text of 153A is very corrupt, and seems to differ greatly from the
original. The variants between the chief documents are considerable, and
show that the understanding of it was nearly lost. It probably had two
different versions, which have been cast into one, since after the first
two-thirds it begins over again and nearly repeats itself.

The Turin text contains only 153A, and that even much shorter, but it is
followed by a rubric, which is absent from the Theban version.

The translation is made from the three above-named documents.

The vignette of 153A, in the papyrus III, 93, of the Louvre (_Pb_),
shows a clap-net drawn by four men. Behind it comes the deceased,
holding in his hand two instruments mentioned in the text: the ⁂ and
the ⁂, called ⁂⁂⁂⁂ or ⁂⁂⁂ each of them
consists of different parts having a distinct name.

In the papyrus of _Nu_ the deceased is seen drawing the rope of the net.

In the vignette of London, 9900 (_Aa_), he is supposed to do the same.

1. Among the dangers to which the deceased is exposed is that of being
caught in a net by hidden genii, who will treat him as is done to
water-fowl or fishes. But he escapes from this peril, because he knows
the names of the fowlers and fishermen who intend to attack him, and
also of the net itself, and of the various parts of which it consists.
All these names are mystical; they are connected with some divinity, and
this gives them a magical power, owing to which the deceased can make
his escape.

2. I suppose this means fishermen, sons of fishermen.

3. Litt. the hands: the bars, the sides of the frame of the net.

4. The fingers are often mentioned when we should say the hand. The act
or the wound is attributed to the fingers. “Whose fingers are hidden,”
means he who hides the hand with which he will strike.

5. ⁂. The instrument in the hand of the deceased. Though the
determinative is ⁂, it does not necessarily mean that it is made of
wood; it may be the determinative of weapons in general. It has prongs,
which are compared to nails or claws, so that it probably is a weapon
like the bident for spearing fishes, the tines of which are held
together by a string (Wilkinson, _Manners and Customs_, 2nd edition,
Vol. II, p. 107). Otherwise it is not unlike a netting needle
(Wilkinson, _loc. cit._, p. 175). If it is a weapon, one does not very
well understand why it is said to belong to the net.

6. The ⁂⁂⁂⁂ is evidently the stake or peg to which the end
of the clap-net is fastened. But it must be noticed that in the vignette
of London, 9900, this peg is a dagger. Therefore one may speak of its
pointed head ⁂ (Brugsch, _Dict. Suppl._, p. 85), and of its
⁂⁂⁂, blade.

7. Nemu is perhaps a local name of Horus (Brugsch, _Dict. geog._, p.
71).

8. ⁂⁂⁂. “The god in Lion form” (Renouf) is the name of the
Sphinx (_Sphinx_, Vol. V, p. 193).

9. See Chapter 149, note 5.

10. We know from an inscription at Dendereh that the
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, the drinkers, feast on blood,
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ (Brugsch, _Dict. Suppl._, p. 18).

11. The late recension of Chapter 153 ends here, and does not contain
153B. It is followed by this rubric:

_Said on a figure of the deceased which is placed in a boat. Thou shalt
put the Sektit boat on his right, and the Âtit boat on his left.
Offerings will be made to him of cakes, beer, and all good things, on
the day of the birth of Osiris. He to whom these things have been done
will be a living soul for ever, and will not die a second time._

12. ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. I consider this word as derived from
⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂⁂, which means to mark an object with a
cut or with fire, for a religious purpose, or simply as an
indication of property. A little further it is spoken of fishes
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ “marked on the tail.”

13. We have here the opposition between ⁂⁂ “those who are,” and
⁂⁂ “those who are not,” that is, those who are not yet,
the future ones. The negative, which often expresses the
idea of anteriority, is one of the usual ways of rendering
the future; that which has not yet taken place, which is
to come. An official of the XIIth dynasty says: “the king
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ made me his
commissioner of works, having charge of present and future work”
(_Zeitschr._, 1882, p. 8, note). It is said of Isis that “she issues her
directions for what is and what will be” ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂
(Stèle Metternich, Brugsch, _Dict. Suppl._, p. 355).

14. See Chapter 1, note 8.

15. ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. As they are sometimes mentioned before
the gods, I believe the word might be translated, the first beings, the
first creatures: “die Urwesen.”

16. Here begins the second version of the chapter which has been added
to the other one.

17. ⁂⁂⁂⁂. This lake is often mentioned in the texts of the
pyramids. It is one of the celestial lakes not very distant from the
Elysian fields.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE LVI.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration: CHAPTER 153B. =Louvre, III, 93.=]

[Illustration: CHAPTER 154. LEPSIUS, “Todt.”]

[Illustration: CHAPTERS 151, 155, 156. =Louvre, III, 89.=]]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER CLIIIB.

          _The Chapter of escaping from the catchers of fish._


O ye snarers (?), O ye fowlers, O ye fishers, sons of their fathers,
know ye(1.) what I do know, the name of this very great net: the
embracer is its name.

Know ye what I do know, the name of its cordage: the bonds of Isis.

Know ye what I do know, the name of its stake: the thigh of Tmu.

Know ye what I do know, the name of the fork: the finger of Nemu.

Know ye what I do know, the name of its point: the nail of Ptah.

Know ye what I do know, the name of its blade: the knife of Isis.

Know ye what I do know, the name of its weight: the iron which is in the
sky.

Know ye what I do know, the name of its flowers(2.): the feathers of the
hawk.

Know ye what I do know, the name of the fisherman: the cynocephalus.

Know ye what I do know, the name of the ground(3.), where are its
limits: the house of the moon.

Know ye what I do know, the name of him who fishes there: the great
prince who sits on the east of the sky...(4.).

I am Rā,(5.) who proceedeth from Nu, and my soul is divine. I am he who
produceth food, but I execrate what is wrong.

I am Osiris, the possessor of Maāt, and I subsist by means of it every
day.

I am the eternal one, like the bull.(6.) I am feared by the cycle of the
gods in my name of the eternal one.

I am self-originating, together with Nu, in my name of Chepera, from
whom I am born daily.

I am the lord of Daylight, and I shine like Rā; he gives me life in
these his risings in the East.

I come to heaven, I take hold of my place in the East.

The children of the great god nourish him to whom they have given birth,
with sacred offerings.

I eat like Shu. I ease myself like Shu. The king of Egypt (Osiris) is
present. Khonsu and Thoth(7.) their laws are within me. They impart
warmth(8.) to the heavenly host.

                                 NOTES.

This Chapter is found only in two papyri: Paris, III, 93, and the
Papyrus of _Nu._ Both of them are, in some parts, very incorrect. The
Paris document here and there omits a line; I had to use them both for
the translation.

The first part of the Chapter is only a nomenclature of the various
parts of the net, very similar to 153A.

The vignette represents a drag-net drawn by three dog-headed apes.

1. ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. I believe there is a slight difference
of meaning between this old participial form, and the usual
⁂⁂⁂⁂. I consider that the first form means: do you know
well? are you certain to know? or do you pretend to know?

2. ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ I suppose this word means the papyrus flowers
which are sometimes tied to the net. (Bergmann, _H.I._, p. 53.)

3. ⁂⁂ where we had in 153A. ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

4. Here the discrepancies between the two texts are so great, that I do
not venture to give a translation.

5. The following lines are an abridged recension of Chapter 85, where I
repeat Renouf’s translation.

6. The bull of Amenta, Osiris, as he is called in the first Chapter (see
note 5, Chapter 1).

7. ⁂⁂⁂⁂ Thoth, the god of ⁂⁂⁂ ϣⲙⲟⲩⲛ Hermopolis.
(Brugsch, _Dict. Suppl._, p. 927, _Dict. Geog._, p. 749.)

8. ⁂⁂, litt. warmth, means probably a moral quality. In the
Canopus inscription ⁂⁂⁂ corresponds to the Greek κηδεμονικῶς.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE LVII.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration:

  CHAP. 155. CHAP. 156.
  =B. M., 9900.=
]

[Illustration:

  CHAP. 158. CHAP. 157.
  LEPSIUS, “Todt.”
]

[Illustration: CHAPTER 159. =Leyden Papyrus.=]

[Illustration: CHAPTER 160. =Leyden Papyrus.=]

[Illustration: CHAPTER 159. LEPSIUS, “Todt.”]

[Illustration: CHAPTER 160. =B.M., 9900.=]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER CLIV.
  _The Chapter of not letting the body decay(1.) in the Netherworld._


Hail to thee, my father Osiris. I have come to embalm thee. Do thou
embalm this flesh of mine, for I am perfect like my father Chepera, who
is my image, he who does not know corruption.

Come, take hold of my breath of life, lord of the breath, lofty above
his equals; vivify(2.) me, build me up, thou lord of the funeral chest.

Grant me to go down into the land of eternity, as thou doest when thou
art with thy father Tmu, he whose body never decays, he who does not
know destruction.

I have not done what thou hatest, the command (which I obey) is that
which thy _ka_ loveth,(3.) I have not transgressed it.

I have been delivered, being thy follower, O Tmu, from the rottenness
which thou allowest to come over every god, every goddess, every animal,
every creeping thing which is corruptible.

After his soul has departed he dies,(4.) and when it has gone down he
decays; he is all corruption; all his bones are rottenness,
putrefaction(5.) seizes his limbs and makes his bones break down, his
flesh becomes a fetid liquid, his breath is stink, he becomes a
multitude of worms.

(As for me) there are no worms(6.). He is impotent whoever has lost the
eye of Shu(7.) among all gods and goddesses, all birds and fishes, all
snakes and worms, all animals altogether, for I cause them to crawl
before me, they recognise me and the fear of me prevails over them, and
behold every being is alike dead among all animals, all birds, all
fishes, all snakes, all worms, their life is like death.

Let there be no food for the worms all of them. Let them not come to me
when they are born, I shall not be handed over to the destroyer in his
cover, who destroys the limbs, the hidden one who causes corruption, who
cuts to pieces(8.) many dead bodies, who lives from destroying.

He lives who performs his commands, but I have not been delivered into
his fingers, he has not prevailed upon me, for I am under thy command,
lord of the gods.

Hail to thee, my father Osiris! thy limbs are lasting, thou dost not
know corruption; there are no worms with thee, thou art not repugnant,
thou dost not stink, thou dost not putrefy, thou wilt not become worms.

I am Chepera, my limbs are lasting for ever. I do not know corruption. I
do not rot, I do not putrefy, I do not become worms. I do not lose the
eye of Shu.

I am, I am, I live, I live, I grow, I grow, and when I shall awake in
peace, I shall not be in corruption, I shall not be destroyed in my
bandages. I shall be free of pestilence, my eye will not be corrupted,
my skin (?) will not disappear. My ear will not be deaf, my head will
not be taken away from my neck, my tongue will not be torn away, my hair
will not be cut off, my eyebrows shall not be shaven off. No grievous
harm shall come upon me, my body is firm, it shall not be destroyed. It
shall not perish in this earth for ever.

                                 NOTES.

This Chapter is not frequently met with in the papyri; it was written on
the wrappings and the bandages of the dead; for instance, on the funeral
cloth of King Thothmes III, where it is not complete. This Chapter is
interesting, as it shows how repulsive to the Egyptians was the idea of
corruption, of the decay of the body, which is described here in most
realistic terms. This is one of the reasons why they gave such
importance to mummification.

Parts of this Chapter are very obscure. The translation has been made
from the text on the mummy cloth of Thothmes III, supplemented by the
Papyrus of _Nu_.

The only vignette we have is that of the Turin Papyrus, showing a mummy
lying on the bed, and illumined by the rays of the sun.

1. ⁂⁂⁂, “to pass away, to disappear through corruption or
decay.” Sometimes it seems to have an active sense: to let something
pass away, to lose it.

2. ⁂⁂⁂, ⁂ is generally translated “firm, stable, abiding”
(Chapter 1, note 9), but I believe in most cases it has another
sense: “to vivify, to impart the breath of life,” as one may
judge from the title of Chapter 182, which mentions two
acts, one of which is the consequence of the other,
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂:
“the book of vivifying Osiris, giving breath to him whose heart is
motionless.”

In the mythological or celestial geography ⁂⁂⁂ is the East (Pl.
IV). There life originates; there also the deceased inhales the breath
of life (Chapter 57, p. 110; Naville, _Todt._, Einl., p. 28).

3. See _Sphinx_, V, p. 199.

4. ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. I consider ⁂⁂ as being here
the adverb _afterwards_. His soul goes out, and _afterwards_ he dies, it
goes down and _afterwards_ he decays.

5. ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, litt. the destroyers; the word occurs
again further on: the destroyer who is in his bush(?) or cover, the
hidden one. It is evidently a metaphor, for the sense is obvious; it is
putrefaction. The word in the Turin papyrus ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, litt.
locks, might apply to the vegetation or the excrescences which are often
the sign of putrefaction.

6. ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. The passage is very obscure. I
believe the drift of the idea is this: after having described very
thoroughly what corruption is, the deceased says: as for me I am
protected against those evils. Even should every being fall into
corruption, having lost the eye of Shu, it is nothing to me, because I
am feared by all.

⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ “worms do not exist.” ⁂⁂ is explained by
two passages. At Abydos the priest says to the god (Mar., _Abydos_, I,
p. 34) ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. “I have
come to perform the ceremonies, for I have not come to do nothing, I
have not come in vain.” In the poem of Pentaur, when Rameses II,
addressing Amen, recalls all he has done to honour the god, he says:
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂:
“is it nothing, this thy terrace which I built for thee?”

7. The eye of Shu is either an amulet or a magic power residing in some
part of the body, which prevents it from becoming worms. It is the
defence against corruption. Further the deceased says: “I do not become
worms; I do not lose the eye of Shu.”

8. Litt. ploughs into dead bodies.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER CLV.

                   _Chapter of the Tat of gold._(1.)

Here is thy backbone,(2.) thou still-heart! here is thy spine, thou
still-heart! Put it close to thee. I have given thee the water thou
wantest.(3.) Here it is. I have brought to thee the Tat, in which thy
heart rejoiceth.

_Said on a Tat of gold inlaid into the substance of sycamore-wood, and
dipped into juice of ankhamu. If it is put on the neck of this Chu, he
arrives at the doors of the Tuat, and he comes forth by day, even though
he be silent. The Tat is put in its place on the first day of the year,
as is done to the followers of Osiris._

                                 NOTES.

After the interruption due to Chapters 153 and 154, we revert to the
series inaugurated by 151, the description of the chamber in which the
mummy is deposited, and of the funeral equipment of the deceased, his
amulets and ornaments. The papyrus III, 93 (Pb), of the Louvre, throws
several of these Chapters into one, with the title: _the description of
the hidden things of the Tuat_, and the vignette (Pl. LV) represents
three figures of Chapter 151: the statuette, the torch or flame, and the
Anubis; besides two _Tat_ of different substances, one of them for the
wall, and one to be put on the neck of the deceased, and a buckle.

The vignette of Chapter 155 represents a Tat of gold. The various
versions of the Chapter differ mostly in the rubric. I followed the
papyrus of Nebseni (Aa), filling up the gaps from other texts.

1. The rubric seems to explain that the text refers to a Tat of gold,
which is inlaid into the wood of a mummy-shaped coffin, on the neck, and
which holds fast by means of the sap or gum of a tree or fruit called
_ankhamu_.

2. This shows that the Tat is originally a conventional representation
of a backbone.

3. The juice or gum just mentioned, in which the Tat is dipped.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER CLVI.

  _Chapter of the buckle of carnelian, which is put on the neck of the
                               deceased._

The blood of Isis, the virtue of Isis; the magic power of Isis, the
magic power of the Eye are protecting this the Great one; they prevent
any wrong being done to him.

_This Chapter is said on a buckle of carnelian dipped into the juice of
ankhamu, inlaid into the substance of the sycamore-wood, and put on the
neck of the deceased._

_Whoever has this Chapter read to him, the virtue of Isis protects him;
Horus the son of Isis rejoices in seeing him, and no way is barred to
him, unfailingly._

                                 NOTES.

M. Maspero, who made a special study of this Chapter (_Le chapitre de la
boucle, Comptes Rendus de l’Acad. des Inscr. et Bell. Lettres_, 1871),
has shown that there are several recensions. This, which is probably the
oldest, is taken from the papyrus of Nebseni, with a few additions from
texts of the same date.

The protective power of the buckle is shown in the vignette of Chapter
93, where a buckle with human hands grasps the deceased by the left arm,
and prevents him from going towards the East.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER CLVII.

   _Chapter of the vulture of gold, put on the neck of the deceased._


Isis has arrived; she hovers over the dwellings, and she searches all
the hidden abodes of Horus when he comes out of the Northern marshes,
knocking down him whose face is evil.

She causes him to join the Bark, and grants him the sovereignty over the
worlds.

When he has fought a big fight, he decrees what must be done in his
honour; he causes fear of him to arise, and he creates terror.

His mother, the Great one, uses her protective power, which she has
handed over to Horus.

_Said on a vulture of gold. If this Chapter is written on it, it
protects the deceased, the powerful one, on the day of the funeral,
undeviatingly for times infinite._

                                 NOTES.

This and the two following Chapters have not been found in the old
recension. They are taken from the Turin text.

The vignette represents a vulture with outspread wings, which is often
found made of cartonnage on the mummies. The same bird is often painted
on the ceilings of tombs or temples.

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER CLVIII.

 _The Chapter of the collar of gold, put on the neck of the deceased._


O my father! my brother! my mother Isis! I am unveiled and I am seen. I
am one of the unveiled ones, who see Seb.

_Said on a collar of gold, on which this Chapter has been written, and
which is put on the neck of the deceased, the day of his burial._

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER CLIX.

 _The Chapter of the column of green Felspar,_(1.) _put on the neck of
                             the deceased._


O thou who comest out every day, in the divine house, she who has a big
voice, who goeth round.... She takes hold of the potent formulæ of her
father, the mummy which is on the bull.(2.) She is Renent....

_Said on a column of green Felspar, on which this Chapter has been
written, and which is put on the neck of the deceased._

                                 NOTES.

The vignette of this Chapter and the next, show distinctly that the
⁂ is a miniature column or tent-pole, with the papyrus capital, and
papyrus leaves at the base.

This Chapter is taken from the Turin text; parts of it are quite
unintelligible.

1. ⁂⁂⁂, a mineral which has not yet been determined. Brugsch
calls it “Opal.” Lepsius thought its colour was blue. Dr. Budge
translates “mother-of-emerald.” Renouf’s translation is “green Felspar”
(see Chapter 29B, note).

2. The mummy carried off by the Apis bull, a representation often seen
on the coffins after the XXIInd dynasty.

                  ------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER CLX.

                 _Giving the column of green Felspar._


I am the column of green Felspar, which cannot be crushed,(1.) and which
is raised by the hand of Thoth.

Injury is an abomination for it. If it is safe, I am safe; if it is not
injured, I am not injured; if it receives no cut, I receive no cut.

Said by Thoth: arise, come in peace, lord of Heliopolis, lord who
resides at Pu.

When Shu has arrived, he found the stone at Shenemu, as its name is
_neshem_. He (the deceased) makes his abode in the enclosure of the
great god; whilst Tmu resides in his dwelling;(2.) his limbs will never
be crushed.

                                 NOTES.

For Chapter 160, we have a text from London, 9900 (_Aa_); it is not
complete, but the gaps can very easily be filled up from the Papyrus
Busca.

The vignette of _Aa_ represents Thoth bringing the column, enclosed in a
box or a casket.

1. I suppose the symbolical expressions of this Chapter mean that the
_neshem_, of which the column is made, is a very hard stone, which is
proof against any injury.

⁂⁂ or ⁂⁂, which I translated “crush,” means probably “grind
to powder,” and ⁂⁂, “to receive a cut,” means to be scratched or
incised by a sculptor’s tool. The power of the amulet consists in making
the body of the deceased as hard as _neshem_.

2. ⁂, a variant of ⁂ when it refers to Tmu (Nav., _Todt._, ch.
XVII, l. 12).

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER CLXI.

  _The Chapter of unfastening the opening in the sky. Thoth does it so
    that it may be finished when he opens (the sky) with Aten._(1.)


Rā(2.) is living, the tortoise(3.) is dead. The body has been offered in
the earth; the bones have been offered of _N._ [The West wind of
Isis].(4.)

Rā is living, the tortoise is dead. It is safe that is in the funeral
chest of _N._ [The East wind of Nephthys.]

Rā is living, the tortoise is dead, the limbs are well wrapped up.
Kebehsenef is to keep watch over them for _N._ [The North wind of
Osiris.]

Rā is living, the tortoise is dead. His wrappings have been opened; they
reveal his figure. [The South wind of Rā.]

_Everybody who has these figures on his coffin, the four openings of the
sky are open to him; one in the North, it is the wind of Osiris; one in
the South, it is the wind of Aah (the moon); one in the West, it is the
wind of Isis; one in the East, it is the wind of Nephthys. Every one of
these winds, which are at his entrance when he wants it, breathes into
his nostrils._

_Let no one outside know it, it is a mystery which is not known to the
common people. Do not reveal it to any one, may he be thy father or thy
son, except thyself. It is a real mystery, and every one of these things
is unknown to all men._

                                 NOTES.

This Chapter is so short in the old recension (Paris, III, 93) that it
could hardly be understood without the rubric of the Turin text. The
four Thoths, each of whom opens a door, are the four winds, coming from
the four cardinal points (_Zeitschr. für Aeg. Sprache_, 1877, p. 28).

We have already learned from Chapter 59 that it is one of the privileges
of the deceased to have the command of the four winds.]

1. The title is obscure. I suppose that the scribe, who had a very short
space at his disposal, left out a word or two.

2. Magic formula, which enables Thoth to open the door.

3. See Chapter 83, note 1. Brugsch calls the tortoise the evil
principle.

4. The words in brackets, as well as the rubric, are taken from the
Turin Todtenbuch.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE LVIII.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CLXII.
  LEPSIUS, Todtenbuch.
]

[Illustration: CHAPTER CLXIV. LEPSIUS, Todtenbuch.]

[Illustration: CHAPTER CLXIII. LEPSIUS, Todtenbuch.]

[Illustration: CHAPTER CLXV. LEPSIUS, Todtenbuch.]

[Illustration: CHAPTER CLXVI, _A. a._]

[Illustration: CHAPTER CLXVII, _A. a._]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER CLXII.

     _Chapter of causing a flame(1.) to arise under the head of the
                               deceased._


Hail to thee, thou lion,(2.) thou mighty one, with high plumes, the lord
of the double crown, who wavest the flail, thou art the lord of the
phallus,(3.) thou art vigorous when ariseth the morning light, to the
rays of which there is no limit.

Thou art the lord of forms, with numerous colours, who conceals himself
within his eye to his children.

Thou art the mighty enchanter among the cycle of the gods, thou swift
runner, with quick strides. Thou art the mighty god who cometh to him
who calleth for him, who delivereth the oppressed from his tortures.
Come to my voice. I am the cow. Thy name is in my mouth. I am going to
utter it. Hakahaka(4.) is thy name. Furaa is thy name. Aakarsa is thy
name. Ankrobata is thy name. Khermauserau is thy name. Kharosata is thy
name.

I adore thy name. I am the cow. Listen to my voice, on the day when thou
puttest a flame under the head of Rā. Behold he is in the Tuat, and he
is mighty in Heliopolis.(5.) Grant that he may be like one who is on
earth. He is thy son, who loves thee. Do not ignore his name. Come to
Osiris _N._ Grant that a flame may arise under his head, for he is the
soul of the great body which rests in Heliopolis; the shining one, the
form of the firstborn is his name. Barokatat’aua is his name.

Come, grant him to be like one of thy followers, for he is even as thou
art.

_Said on the image of a cow, made of pure gold, to be put on the neck of
the deceased. Also if it is painted on new papyrus, and put under his
head, there will be a quantity of flames all around him like those that
are on earth. This is a very great protection, which the cow granted to
her son Rā, after he had gone to rest. His abode is surrounded by
warriors of blazing fire._(6.)

_If thou puttest this goddess on the neck of the Ring who is on earth,
he is like fire in pursuing his enemies, his horses cannot stop._

_If thou puttest it on the neck of a man after his death, he is mighty
in the Netherworld. Nobody will drive him away from the gates of the
Tuat undeviatingly._

_And thou shalt say when thou puttest this goddess on the neck of the
deceased: O Amon of Amons, thou who art in the sky, turn thy face
towards the body of thy son, make him sound in the Netherworld._

_This book is most secret. Do not let it be seen by any man, for it is
forbidden to know it. Let it be hidden. It is called the book of the
mistress of the hidden abode. This is the end._

                                 NOTES.

Chapters 162-165 are of a very date date. They are of a different
character from the other chapters of the Book of the Dead. They belong
rather to the magic books of the old Egyptians. When they were written
there was a decay in the religion, which drifted more and more into
magic, for which the Egyptians were famous under the Roman Empire. We
find there a great number of barbarous words unintelligible to us, and
probably also to the old scribes, since they differ widely according to
the papyri. They remind us of those which are found in the magical texts
(Chabas, _Pap. Magique Harris_, p. 151)

It is probable that Chapter 162 is older than the following; several
papyri end with it, and it has the rubric ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _this is
the end_, which is found in the older texts after Chapter 149.

The late Dr. Pleyte, of Leyden, made a special study of these chapters,
and of several others of late date (_Chapitres supplémentaires du Livre
des Morts, Texte, Traduction et Commentaire_, Leide). The collation
which he published of various documents is the text on which this
translation has been made.

The vignette generally consists of a cow, having between her horns a
solar disk, with two plumes. Occasionally behind her there is a goddess
with a cow’s head having the same attribute. This cow I consider to be
the goddess Nut, the mother of Rā. An image of the cow, made of pure
gold, is to be put on the neck of the deceased; or, what would be much
easier and cheaper, it is to be painted on a hypocephalus of new
papyrus, and put under the deceased’s head. Part of this chapter is the
usual text found on the hypocephali.

The result of the gift of one of these amulets will be that in the
Netherworld the deceased will be surrounded by flames. This is the
effect of the presence of the amulets here described. It does not take
place in this world, but in the other, where Rā himself enjoys a similar
protection, being surrounded by “warriors of blazing fire.” This image
seems to point to the magnificent sunsets often seen in Egypt.

1. All the translators have interpreted ⁂⁂⁂ by “heat,” the
vital heat of the body. But this is not the true sense of the word,
which means “flame,” ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ “flame of fire.” The root
⁂⁂ implies the idea of darting, springing forth like a flame or a
spark, and not of latent heat. ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ cannot mean
anything except a great quantity of flames. These flames will be the
protection of the deceased.

2. The lion addressed by the cow, a god of light and fire, is probably
Rā himself.

3. For the connection between generation and light, see Kuhn,
“Herabkunft des Feuers,” p. 70 and ff.

4. These barbarous names, as well as those of the following chapters,
have not yet been explained. Their interpretation is to be looked for in
the African languages, for Chapter 164 connects them with the speech of
the negroes, and the Anti of Nubia.

5. I have kept for ⁂⁂ Renouf’s translation: Heliopolis. But it
must not be understood as referring to the well-known city at the head
of the Delta. ⁂⁂ is here a city in the other world. It is a name
belonging to the mythological and not to the terrestrial geography.

6. I consider the word ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ of the Turin
text, or according to other papyri,
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ as connected with
⁂⁂ _fire_, _burning_.

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER CLXIII.

_Chapters brought from another book, in addition to the “coming forth by
day.” Chapter of not letting the body of a man decay in the Netherworld,
of rescuing him from the devourers of souls who imprison men in the
Tuat, and of not raising his sins on earth against him, but of saving
his flesh and his bones from the worms and from every evil-doing god in
the Netherworld, so that he may go in and out as he likes, and do
everything he desires without restraint._


--I am the soul of the great body which rests in Arohabu. I am
protecting the body of Hanirta, the lord of motion, who rests in the
marshes of Senhakarokana.

--O thou soul of souls, who art not unwilling to rise when thou restest
in thy body which dwelleth in Senhakarokana! Come to Osiris _N._,
deliver him from the Powers of the god whose face is terrible, who takes
possession of the heart, and takes hold of the limbs; a flame rushes out
of their mouths, so that they consume the souls.

--O he who goes to rest in his body, and then rises a burning heat,
blazing even within the sea, and the sea goes up because of this burning
vapour, at the time of the morning; come, bring thy fire; pour thy
burning vapour on him who will raise his hand against Osiris _N._ for
ever and ever.

--Hail, Osiris _N._, thy duration is that of the sky; thy duration is
the duration of the ultimate circles,(1.) The sky holds thy soul; this
earth holds thy figure.

--Deliver Osiris _N._ Do not let him be carried away by his enemies, to
him who devours the soul, who raises evil accusations. Restore his soul
to his body and his body to his soul.

--It is he who is hidden in the pupil, in the Eye of Sharosharo.
Shapuarika is his name. He resides on the north-west front of Apt, in
the land of Nubia, and he will never navigate towards the East.

--O Amon the bull, the scarab, the lord of the two eyes whose name is:
he with the terrible pupil. Osiris _N._ is the image of thy two eyes,
Sharosharo is the name of one, Shapuarika is the name of the other one.
He is Shaka Amon, Shaka Nasarohaut; Tmu who illuminates the two earths
is his true name. Come to Osiris _N._, he belongs to the land of Truth,
do not leave him alone. He is of the land which is not seen again.

--Thy name is with the mighty Glorified.(2.) He is the soul of the great
body which is in Sais of Neith.

_Said on a serpent having two legs, and bearing a two-horned disk. Two
eyes are before him, having two legs and two wings._

_In the pupil of one is the image of one raising his arm, with the face
of Bes, wearing his plumes, and having the back of a hawk._

_It is painted with anti and shethu, mixed with green colour of the
South, and with water from the Western Lake of Egypt; on a bandage of
new linen, in which all the limbs of a man will be wrapped._

_Thus he will not be driven away from all the gates of the Tuat; he will
eat, drink, ease his body as if he were on earth; no outcry will be
raised against him; his enemies will be powerless (?) against him._

_If this book is read on earth,(3.) he is not carried away by the
messengers, the wicked ones who do evil on all the earth; and he will
not be wounded, he will not die from the blow of the king. He will not
be taken to prison; for he will go in to his attendants and go out
victorious, he will be free from the fear of evil doers who are on the
whole earth._

                                 NOTES.

This Chapter begins with a general title applying to 163-5, and probably
to other ones not included in the papyrus of Turin: “Chapters brought
from another book, an addition to the coming forth by day.” This means
that these chapters were not considered as belonging to the
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ “the coming forth by day,” the original Book
of the Dead, which in old times ended with Chapter 149, and later on
with Chapter 162.

The vignettes represent the figures described in the rubric for which
the chapter was written.

Dr. Pleyte first discovered that this Chapter is a kind of dialogue,
consisting of words spoken by the god, and a prayer addressed to him in
favour of the deceased. The strange names which occur in the text lead
us here also to Africa, since it is said of the deceased that he resides
in Apt of Nubia, Napata.

1. A papyrus, in Turin of a woman, reads here
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂
etc., “thy duration is the duration of the ultimate circles.”

2. ⁂⁂⁂⁂ _Chuu_. Renouf either keeps the Egyptian word, or
translates: “the Glorious ones, the Glorified.” See note 1, ch. 1, ch.
15, etc.

3. The amulet has also an influence on earth, it protects a man against
hidden dangers, which arise not from men but from some invisible causes,
and agents like those evil messengers, probably spirits, who might be
called “angels.” I believe that ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, “the blow
of the king,” must mean some sudden illness like ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.
Dr. Pleyte also considers this part of the rubric as applying to a man’s
life on earth; there is only this expression ⁂⁂⁂⁂ which
does not agree with this explanation, and would rather lead us to think
that what is described in this part of the rubric takes place in the
other world.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER CLXIV.

                           _Another Chapter._


Hail, Sekhet, Bast, daughter of Rā, lady of the gods, who holdeth her
fan of plumes, the lady of the scarlet garment, the mistress of the
white and red crown, the only one who stands above her father, when
there are no gods to stand above her; the great magician in the boat of
millions of years, lofty when she rises in the abode of silence, the
mother of the Shakas, the royal wife of the lion Haka.

These are the forms of the princess, the mistress of the funereal
chamber, the mother on the horizon of the sky, the joyful, the beloved,
who destroyeth the rebels collected in her fist.

She stands at the prow of the boat of her father, in order to strike
down the evildoer, in order to place Maāt at the prow of the boat of Rā.

Neith, the burning one, after whom nothing remains; she who follows
Kaharo, who follows Saromkaharomat is thy name, thou art the mighty
burning wind behind Kanas,(1.) at the prow of the boat of her father
Haropukaka Scharoshaba, in the language of the negroes and of the Anti
of the land of Nubia(2.).

Acclamations to thee, mightier than the gods; thou art praised by the
gods of Hermopolis, the living spirits who are in their tabernacles.
They give praise to the valour of Mut (?),(3.) and they begin to bring
offerings to the mysterious gates. Their bones are sound, they are
delivered from dangers; they become powerful in the eternal abode; they
are delivered from the society of the wicked one, the spirit with a
terrible face, which is among the assembly of the gods.

The child(4.) who is born of him with the terrible face, will hide his
body to the cursed serpent whose breath is burning; because he has found
the names; the mysterious lion is one, the soul of the dwarf (is the
other). As for the eye of the great one, the princess of the gods, her
name is she who partakes of the name of Mut.

His soul is powerful, his body is sound; they are safe from the abode of
the enemies who are in the society of the wicked one. They will not be
imprisoned.

These words which were spoken by the mouth of the goddess herself have
become the words of the goddesses, and the male gods, and of every soul
to whom a burial is given.

_Said on a Mut having three faces: one is the face of the Pekha-vulture
having two plumes; the other is the face of a man, wearing the red and
the white crown. The other is a face of a Ner-vulture, having two
plumes, with a phallus and wings and the claws of a lion._

_It is painted with anti with resin (?) mixed with green colour, on a
scarlet bandage. There is a dwarf in front and behind her; he looks at
her and wears two plumes. He has one arm raised, and he has two faces,
one of a hawk and the other of a man._

_He whose body is wrapped up in these bandages, he is mighty among the
gods in the Netherworld. He is never repulsed; his flesh and his bones
are like one who never died; he drinks at the source of the river, he
receives fields in the garden of Aarru; a star in the sky is given to
him._

_He is delivered from the fiend-serpent with a burning mouth. His soul
will not be imprisoned like a bird; he will be lord of those around him,
and he will not be eaten by worms._

                                 NOTES.

The translation of these magical Chapters is still more uncertain than
that of the rest of the book, and the text is often very corrupt.

The vignette consists of the three figures described in the rubric. That
which is given here is taken from the Turin papyrus. It differs slightly
from the description and from the vignettes of the other texts. The
middle figure should have a man’s body with a lion’s claws.

1. A papyrus at Leyden reads here ⁂⁂⁂⁂ the enemies.

2. There it is said distinctly that these barbarous words belong to
African languages. They are probably not all proper names; some of them
seem to have a sense which we have not yet discovered, for instance, the
word _Shakas_ in this expression: the mother of the Shakas.

3. Very uncertain text.

4. These words seem to apply to the deceased.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER CLXV.

 _Chapter of landing and not being obscured, so that the body may prosper
                         in drinking water._(1.)


O the very high one, the great one,

Amen, Amen, the lion Kasapa,

The first-born of the gods on the East of the sky.

Amon of the Takruti,

Amon who hides his colours, whose forms are mysterious, and who is
master of the horns of Horus,

The great one of Nut.

Kaarki is thy name,

Kasaka is thy name,

The Sphinx is thy name,

Kasabaka is thy name.

Amon of the Ankak Takashar, Amon the sphinx is thy name. O Amon! I
implore thee. Behold, I know thy name; thy forms are in my mouth,(2.)
and thy colours in my eyes.

Come towards thy offspring, thy form, Osiris _N._ Bring him towards the
gate of eternity, grant him to rest in the Tuat; that his flesh may be
entire in the Netherworld; that his soul may be powerful, that his body
may be complete,(3.) that he may be free from the society of the wicked
one, that he may never be fettered.

I implore thy name, and thou art a shield for me; for thou believest
that I know thee.

O great one, great one,

Amon (the hidden one) is thy name,

Rukashaka is thy name,

Thou art for me a shield.

Baarkai is thy name,

Markata is thy name,

The Sphinx is thy name,

Nasakabuba is thy name,

Tanasasa is thy name,

Sharshatakata is thy name.

Amon, Amon, O God, O God, Amon.

I implore thy name, and as I have given thee to understand (that I know
thee), grant me to rest in the Tuat, and that all my limbs be reunited.

Said by the Spirit which is in Nut: I am doing, I am doing all thou hast
said.

_Said on the figure with raised arm. There are plumes on its head; its
legs are apart; its torso is a scarab. It is painted in blue with liquid
gum._

_Said also on a figure the middle part of which is that of a man; his
arms are hanging down. The head of a ram is on his right shoulder, and
another on his left shoulder. Thou wilt paint on one bandage the two
figures of the god with raised arm, and put it across the chest of the
deceased, so that the two painted figures may be on his breast._

_He to whom this has been done, the impure ones in the Tuat can do
nothing to him. He drinks the running water of the stream, he shines
like a star in the sky._(4.)

                                 NOTES.

The vignettes consist of the amulets described in the rubrics.

1. The explanation to this extraordinary title seems to be given in the
last sentence of the rubric, where it is said of the deceased: “he
drinks the running water of the stream, he shines like a star in the
sky.” The amulet for which this text was written will prevent the
deceased, who is to be as bright as a star, from having his light taken
from him, from being obscured. The other blessing conferred upon him is
that of drinking water of the stream. It is difficult to say why these
two blessings alone are mentioned.

2. I am ready to utter the names of thy different forms, and I see thy
various colours.

3. That his body may be reconstituted. It is curious to find in so late
texts a vague remembrance of what seems to have been the prevalent
custom in prehistoric times, and perhaps also during the Thinite period:
the dismemberment of the body of the deceased. This custom was so
entirely superseded by the opposite process, the mummification and the
careful preservation of the body, that the old tradition is always
mentioned with horror and disgust. The Book of the Dead is full of
objurgations against the dismemberment of the body.

4. The Turin _Todtenbuch_ ends here.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER CLXVI.

                        _Chapter of the Pillow._


Awake! thy sufferings are allayed, _N._ Thou art awaked when thy head is
above the horizon. Stand up, thou art triumphant by means of what has
been done to thee.

Ptah has struck down thine enemies. It has been ordered what should be
done to thee. Thou(1.) art Horus, the son of Hathor, the flame born of a
flame(2.), to whom his head has been restored after it had been cut off.

Thy head will never be taken from thee henceforth.

Thy head will never be carried away.

                                 NOTES.

With Chapter 166 begins a series of chapters which are not in the
Todtenbuch, and which have been collected from various papyri. For most
of them there is only one text, therefore the translation is often very
uncertain.

This Chapter, which is taken from London 9900 (_Aa_), seems to be only a
variant, with a few additional sentences, of Chapter 43, “Chapter
whereby the head of a person is not severed from him in the
Netherworld.” It alludes to the reconstitution of the body of the
deceased, and to providing him with all his sepulchral equipment.
Head-rests like that which is represented in the vignette are often
found in the tombs with the coffins already at the time of the XIth
dynasty.

Chapter 166 was first discovered and translated by Dr. Birch
(_Zeitschr._, 1868, p. 82).

1. Here begin the words of Chapter 43.

2. ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. The second word should
be taken as a patronymic, “flame-born.” Chapter 43 has
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER CLXVII.

                     _Chapter of bringing an Eye._


When Thoth had brought the Eye, he appeased the Eye, After Rā had
wounded(1.) her, she was raging furiously and then Thoth calmed her
after she had gone away raging. As I am sound, she is sound and _N._ is
sound.

                                 NOTES.

This Chapter taken also from London 9900, is a mere abridgment of lines
30-34 in Chapter 17. It refers probably to an eclipse. The Eye, the moon
is pierced or wounded by Rā, which causes the goddess to be furious.
Then, according to Chapter 17, “Thoth calms her troubled state
(Brugsch), and brings her whole and sound without any defect.” This is
called to appease the goddess.

1. The correct reading according to Chapter 17, is: ⁂⁂⁂⁂ or
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ Brugsch (_Dict. Suppl._, p. 751) translates the
word: to pierce.

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER CLXVIII.


Chapter 168 should not have been placed among those of the Book of the
Dead, it belongs to another book similar to the ⁂⁂, the book
engraved on the walls of the royal tombs. It describes gods and genii of
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ _the bounds(1.) in the Tuat_ who confer certain
blessings on the deceased; such as this: “those who lift up their faces
towards the sky at the prow of the boat of Rā, grant that Osiris _N._
may see Rā when he rises.” A vignette gives the appearance of the god or
genius spoken of. Every one of them is followed by this sentence: “for
the libation of a vase has been made on earth by Osiris _N._ who is
(now) the lord of abundance, and goes round the garden of Hotepit.”

The three versions which have been preserved of this text are very
fragmentary. The most complete, papyrus 10478 of the British Museum,
contains only the ⁂⁂⁂ 7 to 12. As the interest of this text,
the character of which is chiefly pictorial, lies in the vignettes, it
has been thought unnecessary to give a translation of it.

1. See note 2, Chapter 127.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER CLXIX.

                 _Chapter of raising the funereal Bed._


Thou art a lion, thou art a sphinx, thou art Horus who avengeth his
father; thou art these four gods, those glorious ones who are shouting
for joy, who are making incantations, and who bring out water by the
power of the tramp of their feet. Thou risest on the right, thou risest
on the left. Seb has opened thy blind eyes,(1.) he has loosened thy legs
which were fettered. Thou hast received thy heart of thy mother, thy
whole heart of thy own body; thy soul is in the sky, thy body is under
the ground. There is bread for thy body, water for thy throat, sweet
breeze for thy nostrils.

Thou restest in their funereal chambers, which those who are in their
coffins have opened for thee and for thy ... when thou journeyest; thou
art firm on thy pedestal, of thy existence, thou appearest in heaven,
and thou fastenest the tackle(2.) by the side of Rā.

Thou fishest with the net on the river, the water of which thou
drinkest; thou walkest on thy feet, and thou dost not walk headlong.
Thou appearest on the surface of the earth, and thou doest not come
forth from under solid ground, the strength(3.) which is in thee will
not be shaken through the action of the god of thy domain.

Thou art pure, thou art pure, thy forepart is purified, thy hindpart is
cleansed with _bet_ and natron, and cooled with incense.

Thou art purified with the milk (given to) Apis, and with beer of the
goddess Tenemit, with natron which removes all what is wrong in thee,
and which was provided by the daughter of Rā when she gave it to her
father Rā; and when she raised for thee the mountain where is buried her
father Osiris.(4.)

I have taken a bite of these sweet things which are on the hands (?) of
Osiris _N._ the loaves (?) from above, which belong to Rā, made of grain
of Abu, and four loaves from below which belong to Seb, made of grain
from the South. The god(5.) of thy domain brings thee the Field of
Hotepit, his hands are before thee.

Thou goest out like Rā, thou art powerful like Rā, thou art in
possession of thy feet. Osiris _N._ is in possession of his feet at all
times and at all hours; thou wilt not be judged, thou wilt not be
imprisoned, thou wilt not be guarded, thou wilt not be put in bonds,
thou wilt not be placed in the house where are the enemies. Cakes are
piled up before thee, and offerings are well guarded for thee.

There is no one to oppose thee and to prevent thee from going out.

Thou receivest thy clothing, thy sandals, thy stick, thy linen, thy
weapons, with which thou wilt cut off heads, thou wilt twist round the
necks of thy foes; these enemies who would bring death to thee, they
will not approach thee.

The great god speaks to thee: Let him be brought here for all that will
happen. The hawk rejoices in thee, the cackler cackles to thee, Rā opens
to thee the doors of the sky. Seb opens for thee the earth.

Thou art great, a mighty(6.) Chu, whose name is not known, the soul
which opens the Amenta. It is mighty this soul of _N._, for he(7.) is
beloved of Rā and well pleasing to his circle, he joins (?) the ways, he
guards the men, and guides the lion to the place where his _ka_ is
propitiated. _N._ ... the lord of mankind causes thee to live and that
thy soul be sound, that thy body may be enduring and great, that thou
mayest see the light(8.) and breathe the wind, that thy face may be
revealed in the house of right, that thou mayest be stationed in the
meadow, and not see any storm, that thou mayest follow the lord of the
two earths, that thou mayest refresh thyself under the _merit_ tree by
the side of the goddess, the great magician.(9.)

Seshait is sitting in front of thee. Sau is protecting thy limbs: the
bull milks for thee his cows which are in the train of Horsechait.(10.)

Thou washest thy face at the mouth of the stream of Cherāba, thou art
welcome to the great gods of Pu and Tepu;(11.) thou seest Thoth
conversing with Rā in the sky. Thou goest out and goest in into Anit,
thou conversest with the Rehiu.

Thy _ka_ is with thee, that thou mayest rejoice; and the heart of thy
birth; thou wakest thy ... are happy; the cycle of the gods give
pleasure to thy heart. Thou goest out (and thou seest) four loaves for
thee from Sechem, and four loaves from Hermopolis; thou goest out and
there are four (loaves) from Heliopolis on the table of the lord of the
two earths.

Thou wakest in the night, and thou art welcome to the lords of
Heliopolis. Hu(12.) is in thy mouth, thy feet do not turn back, there is
life in thy limbs.

Thou seizest the _sma_(13.) at Abydos and thou conductest victuals to
the great gods and vases of drink to those who are above the clouds in
the festival of Osiris, on the morning of the Uak festival; the
_hersheta_ priest decks thee with gold; thy garment is well arranged
with byssus; the Nile rises over thy body; thou art glorious(14.) ...
thou drinkest on the shore of the lake; thou art welcome to the gods who
are in it; thou comest forth in the sky with the gods who bring Maat to
Rā, thou art brought before the cycle of the gods, thou art like one of
them. Thou art the gander among the geese which are offered to Ptah
Anebefres.

                                 NOTES.

This Chapter and the following are found in one papyrus only, Paris,
III, 93, a document more remarkable for the beauty of its vignettes than
for the correctness of the text.

Both Chapters refer to ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ the funereal bed or
couch on which the deceased will lie like Osiris. None of them has a
vignette. As in the course of these chapters there is no mention of the
bed itself, we must suppose that they were read while the bed was raised
or arranged. The translation of this text is particularly difficult, and
often conjectural, owing to our papyrus having no other document to
compare it with.

1. All this bears a great resemblance to Chapter 26.

2. In landing, see Chapter 99.

3. ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂. I have kept Renouf’s translation,
“strength,” but I believe the sense is the same as before:
“solid ground, dry land, continent (Feste, Brugsch),” as we
find in this sentence from the Stele at Abusimbel:
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ “the
mountains, the water, and the continents are shaken by thy name.”

4. For the mountain where the burial of Osiris takes place, see vignette
to Chapter 186.

5. I translate as if there was ⁂⁂.

6. “Mighty,” Renouf’s translation. I should prefer “distinguished,
eminent,” see note 2, Chapters 141-3.

7. ⁂⁂⁂ I read here ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂.

8. The light kindled for his _ka_ (see Chapter 132, A and B), and which
gives life to the _ka_. The lighting of a lamp is a symbol of the birth
(Lep., _Denkm._, III, 74 c.) and accompanies it.

9. For this word I have not followed Renouf’s translation, which would
have been: the master of the words of power (see Chapter. 108).

10. A name of Isis, represented as a cow, and worshipped as such,
chiefly in the town of Apis, the capital of the Libyan nome, near Lake
Mareotis. The bull there was Osiris, and the calf Horus (see note 4 on
Chapter 109).

11. See note 5 on Chapter 18.

12. The god of abundance.

13. ⁂⁂⁂⁂ an unknown object: however, the sense is clear.
This means: thou becomest the ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, the
look-out of the ship which is transporting victuals (see Chapters 109
and 149_b_).

14. The text seems to be very incomplete here.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER CLXX.

                _Chapter of arranging the funereal Bed._


Thy limbs have been given thee, thou takest hold of thy bones, I have
set for thee thy limbs; the earth is bent upon protecting thy flesh.
Thou art Horus who was within the egg; when thou art raised, thou seest
the divine body (of Rā), thou marchest towards the horizon, to the place
where thou likest to be; and when thou art there, there are hailings and
cries of welcome, with all (good things) which appear on the altar.

Horus has raised thee when he rose himself, as he did for him who is in
the sacred abode.

Hail, Osiris, thou art born twice. Ua has raised thee, Anubis on his
mountain has caused thy bandages to grow upon thee. O, _N._ Ptah Sokaris
grants thee to put thy hand on the ornaments of the divine house.

O, _N._, Thoth himself comes to thee with the writing of divine words;
he grants thee to direct thyself towards the horizon of the sky to the
place where thy _ka_ likes to be; he has done it to Osiris on the night
when he came forth living.

Thy white diadem is established on thy brow. The god Nemu is with thee;
he grants thee to be at the head of the...?

Hail, _N._, arise on thy bed, and come forth. Thou are raised by Rā on
the horizon of the Maati in his boat.

Hail, _N._, thou art raised by Tmu, who grants thee to endure for ever.

Hail, _N._, thou art raised by Amsu of Koptos; thou art adored by the
gods of the shrine.

Hail, _N._, blessed be thy coming in peace to thy house of eternity and
to thy everlasting monument.

Salutations to thee in Pu Tepu, in the shrine which thy _ka_ loveth,
within thy dwelling.

Mighty is thy soul, thou hast been raised from thy resting couch (?),
thou art greater than the victim (?) which has been embraced by the
gods.

Thou art like the god who begets the beings. It is admirable what thou
createst more than that of the gods.

Thy splendour is greater than that of the Glorified, thy spirits are
mightier than those who are in (?).

Hail, _N._, thou art raised by Ptah Anebefres, who puts thy dwelling in
front of that of the gods.

Hail, _N._, thou art Horus, the son of Osiris, begotten by Ptah, created
by Nut. Thou shinest like Rā on the horizon when he lighteth the two
earths by his rays.

The gods say to thee: Come, come forth, see what belongs to thee in thy
house of eternity.

Thou hast been raised by Rennut, the great one, who conceived Tmu in the
presence of the circle of the gods of Nut.

I am the second outcome of the sky, and the third of him who makes his
light. I have come out of the womb; I have been an infant like my
father; there are no perverse actions of mine in the various events of
my lot.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER CLXXI

       _Chapter of wrapping up (the deceased) in a pure garment._


O Tmu, Shu, Tefnut, Seb, Nut, Osiris, Isis, Sut, Nephthys, Horus of the
two Horizons, Hathor in the great dwelling, Chepera, Mentu lord of
Thebes, Amon lord of Nestaui, ye the great cycle of the gods, ye the
small cycle of the gods, ye gods and goddesses issued from Nu, Sebek of
Shet, Sebek in all his manifold names, in all the abodes where his _ka_
likes to be; ye gods of the South and of the North, ye gods in heaven
and on earth, grant a pure garment to the mighty Chu _N._; give him to
be glorious by it and destroy all that was wrong in him.

This pure garment of _N._ has been allotted to him for ever, for
eternity, for you destroy all that is wrong in him.

                                 NOTES.

This Chapter, which has no vignette, is found in one papyrus only,
written for a deceased of the name of Amenophis. Its Theban origin is
clearly indicated by the mention of Mentu and Amon, the two great gods
of Thebes.

Its character is different from the Book of the Dead in general. It
seems to be part of a ritual such as the Ritual of Amon and Mut, with
which it has a great likeness (see Moret, _Rituel du culte divin_, ch.
6). (1) The clothing in a pure or perhaps a clean garment, will be the
sign that all that was wrong in the deceased has been destroyed by the
gods. Therefore the deceased calls on them, asking them to complete this
destruction in order that he may shine or be glorious, wearing the pure
garment.

It is alluded to in the next Chapter (fifth verse), “thou puttest on the
pure garment, and thou divestest the apron, when thou stretchest thyself
on the funereal bed.”

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER CLXXII.

    _Beginning of the Chapter of reciting the ceremonies made in the
                             Netherworld._


(1.) ... with _bet_ incense, I inhale the smell of natron and incense
... I have been purified ... through the sacred utterances coming out of
my mouth. I am pure verily ... of the fishes in the river, towards the
statue in the house of purification; they are pure the words of _N._

Blessed be thou, _N._, thou art well pleasing to Ptah, well pleasing to
Anebefres, well pleasing to all gods, well pleasing to all goddesses.
Thy beauties are like a quiet stream, like the choicest water; thy
beauties are like a festival hall in which everyone exalts his god; thy
beauties are like the pillars of Ptah, like the shoots of the _maut_(2.)
plant of Rā. _N._ is the pillar of Ptah and the ewer of Anebefres.

O(3.) thou who art called aloud, thou who art called aloud, thou the
lamented, thou art glorified, thou art exalted, thou art glorious, thou
art strong.

O thou who art raised up, thou art raised up, _N._ has been raised up by
means of all the manifold ceremonies done to him; thy enemies are struck
down; Ptah has struck down thine enemies, thou art victorious and thou
hast dominion over them. Thy words are listened to, what thou hast
ordered is done, thou art raised, thou art triumphant before(4.) the
Circles of gods attached to every god and every goddess.

O thou who art called aloud (_bis_), second verse. Thy head is ... woven
by a woman from Asia; thy face shines brighter than the moon; the top of
thy head is lapis blue; thy hair is darker than the doors of the Tuat,
thy hair is black like the night; thy forehead is adorned of blue; the
rays of Horus are on thy face. Thy garments are of gold; Horus has
decked them with blue; thy eyebrows, the two sisters joined together;
Horus has adorned them with blue; thy nose inhales the perfume of ...
and thy nostrils are like the winds in the sky.

Thy eyes are the seers of the hill of Bachau, thy upper eyelids are
enduring for ever; their lashes are of real lapis; thy pupils are
pleasant gifts, and thy lower eyelids are painted with antimony.

Thy lips utter for thee words of truth, they repeat the words of truth
of Rā which are well pleasing to the gods. Thy teeth are the two heads
of the serpent by which the two gods are seized, thy tongue is voluble;
thy voice is more shrill than that of the bird in the marshes; thy ears
(?) are well established at their place, they go (with thee) to the land
of Amenta.

O thou who art called aloud (_bis_), third verse. Thy neck is adorned
with gold, it is girt with electron;(5.) thy throat and thy lungs are
like Anubis;(6.) thy backbone is like the Uat’ goddesses; thy back is
lined with gold and girt with electron; thy loins(7.) are like Nephthys
...(8.) is a Nile which is flowing. Thy buttocks are two eggs of
crystal, thy legs are well fastened for walking, thou art sitting in thy
place ... thou hast received from the gods thy two eyes.

O thou who art called aloud (_bis_), fourth verse.

Thy throat is like Anubis, thy limbs are necklaces made of gold; thy
breasts are two eggs of crystal which Horus has painted blue, thy
forearms are adorned with topaz, thy shoulders are well established on
their base; thy heart is happy every day, thy whole heart is the work of
the two divine Powers, thy body worships the stars of the gods above and
below; for thy belly is like a calm sky, and thy bowels are the Tuat
which nobody can fathom, and which sends out light in the dark night;
its offerings are eatable plants.

He (_N._) praiseth the Majesty of Thoth, saying: the desires of his
beautiful person take place in my tomb; as my god commanded me. Every
pure thing he loves is there.

O thou who art called aloud (_bis_), fifth verse.

Thy thighs are a pond in a time of abundant inundation; a pond which is
lined by the children of the god of water; thy legs which go to and fro
are of gold; thy knees are lentisks in the marshes; thy feet are firm
every day; thy shin-bones lead thee on the right path.

Thy arms are pillars on their bases; thy fingers are ... of gold; their
nails are like knives of flint in what they do for thee.

O thou who art called aloud (_bis_) ...

Thou puttest on the pure garment and thou divestest thy apron when thou
stretchest thyself on the funereal bed; haunches are cut for thy _ka_,
and a heart is offered unto thy mummy. Thou receivest a bandage of the
finest linen from the hands of the attendant(9.) of Rā; thou eatest on
thy resting couch bread which has been baked by the fire goddess
herself; thou eatest the haunch, thou seizest the meat which has been
prepared by Rā in his holy place; thou washest thy feet in silver basins
made by the skilful artist Sokaris; thou eatest bread placed on the
altar, and prepared by the holy fathers, thou livest upon baked cakes
and hot drinks from the store-house; thou inhalest the smell of flowers;
thy heart is not reluctant at the sight of offerings; thy ministrants
make for thee the loaves and the cakes of the Powers of Heliopolis; and
they themselves bring thee the sacred things; thy offerings have been
chosen for thee; and thy ordinances are in the gates of the Great
Dwelling; thou risest like Sahu and thou arrivest like the morning star;
Nut stretches forth her arms towards thee; Sahu, the son of Rā, and Nut,
the mother of the gods, the two great gods of the sky, they speak one to
another saying: Take him in thy arms; I have brought in my arms the form
of _N._ in the happy day when he is glorified, when his memory is
recorded, when he is in the mouth of all generations.

Thou, raised one, thou hearest how thou art glorified throughout all thy
house.

O thou who ... seventh verse.

Anubis has given him his shroud; he has done all that pleased him; the
high-priest has prepared his ribbon; for he is the provider (?) of the
great god; thou goest and washest thyself in the lake of Perfection,
thou makest offerings in the house of the gods of the sky, and thou
propitiatest the lord of Heliopolis; thou receivest the water of Rā in
ewers, and milk in large vases.

O thou raised one, thou makest offerings on the altar, and thou washest
thy feet upon the stone of ..., the banks of the divine lake; thou
comest forth and thou seest Rā upon the four pillars which are the arms
of the sky; on the head of Anmutef, and on the arms of Apuat who opens
for thee the path; thou seest the horizon where are all the sacred
things which thou desirest.

O thou who are called aloud (_bis_), eighth verse.

All the good things have been spread out for thee, before Rā. Thou hast
a beginning and thou hast an end as Horus and Thoth have ordered for
thee. They call upon _N._, they see how he is glorious, they give him to
come forth like a god to meet the Powers of Heliopolis. Thou journeyest
on the great path as thy mummy has received the sacred things from thy
father; thy hands are wrapped in linen every day; the beginning of the
journey of the god is at the gate of the Great Dwelling,

O thou who art called aloud (_bis_), ninth verse.

_N._ Breatheth the air for his nose and for his nostrils, he receiveth a
thousand geese and sixty baskets of all things good and pure; thy
enemies have been struck down; they are no more.

                                 NOTES.

This Chapter is taken from papyrus London 9900 _Aa_. It has no vignette,
the translation here given is that which I published in 1873
(_Zeitschrift_, 1873, pp. 25 and 81), with a few changes.

1. Lacunæ.

2. Perhaps the ⁂⁂ which M. Loret has identified as being the
celery (_Recueil_, Vol. XVI, p. 4).

3. Here begins a hymn, the first words of which are
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ “O thou who art called aloud,”
repeated twice. These words have become the name of the hymn, as we say
the _Magnificat_ or the _Te Deum_. The hymn is divided into nine
fragments or verses, ⁂⁂ (Renouf, _Life Work_, Vol. II, p. 390).

4. Renouf’s translation. See Chapter 18, § 10. Rather than _before_, I
should translate, _through the action of_.

5. “Electron” is Lepsius’s translation. Renouf, who translates “copper,”
has discussed the point in a letter to Lepsius (_Life Work_, Vol. II, p.
2).

6. I believe this means made of black metal, probably silver, blackened
by some chemical process.

7. Papyrus Ebers ⁂⁂ “foramen ani, rectum.”

8. The text has here ⁂ an evident blunder. We should read here the
phallus.

9. Brugsch, _Dict. Suppl._, p. 1021, translates ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂
_aati_, “Bettenmacher.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE LIX.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration: CHAPTER CLXXIII, _A. a._]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER CLXXIII.

_The addresses of Horus to his father when he goes in to see his father,
  and when he comes out of his great sanctuary to see him Rā Unneferu,
  the master of Ta-tser, and then they embrace one another; therefore he
  is glorious in the Netherworld._


Hail, Osiris; I am thy son Horus; I have come,(1.)

I have avenged (thee).

I have struck down thy enemies.

I have destroyed all that was wrong in thee.

I have killed him who assailed thee.

I stretched forth my hand for thee against thy adversaries.

I have brought thee the companions of Sut with chains upon them.

I have brought thee the land of the South, I have added to thee the land
of the North.

I have settled for thee the divine offerings from the North and the
South.

I have ploughed for thee the fields.

I have irrigated for thee thy land.

I have hoed for thee the ground.

I have built for thee ponds of water.

I have turned up the soil of thy possessions.

I have made there for thee sacrifices of thy adversaries.

I have made sacrifices for thee of thy cattle and thy victims.

I have supplied there in abundance....

I have brought thee....

I have sacrificed for thee....

I have shot for thee antelopes and bulls.

I have plucked for thee geese and waterfowl.

I have bound thy enemies in their chains.

I have fettered thy enemies with their ropes.

I have brought thee from Elephantine the fresh water which refreshes thy
heart.

I have brought thee all the plants.

I have settled for thee on the earth all thy subsistence as to Rā.

I have made for thee bread at Pu with red grain.

I have made for thee drink at Tepu with white grain.

I have ploughed for thee wheat and barley in the Field of Aarru.

I have mowed them there for thee.

I have glorified thee.

I have given thee thy soul.

I have given thee thy power.

I have given thee....

I have given thee....

I have given thee the dread which thou inspirest.

I have given thee thy bravery.

I have given thee thy two eyes, the two plumes which are on thy head.

I have given thee Isis and Nephthys, they are placed on thee.

I have anointed thee with the offering of holy oil.

I have brought thee the offering by which thy face is destroyed.(2.)

                                 NOTES.

This Chapter is taken also from London 9900. The vignette at the end
represents Osiris sitting in a naos. Before him are the offerings of
fowl and cattle which Horus presents to his father. At the beginning the
deceased is seen, with raised arms; he is supposed to be Horus, and
above him are written the following words:--“Adoration to Osiris, Khenta
Amenta, the great god, the lord of Abydos, king for ever, prince of
eternity, the venerable god in Restau, pronounced by _N._, I give thee
grain, lord of the gods, the one god who liveth on justice. I am thy son
Horus. I have come to thee. I avenge thee, I bring to thee Maat, to the
place where is the circle of thy gods. Grant me to be among thy
followers, and to smite thy enemies. I have established for thee thy
food offerings on the earth for ever.”

This Chapter was first published and translated in the _Zeitschrift_,
Vol. XIII, p. 83.

1. These words are repeated before every one of the following sentences.

2. This sentence is abridged. It is given in full by the Ritual at
Abydos: “I have anointed thy head with the oil of the brow of Horus; if
it is destroyed there (on his brow) he is destroyed as god; _i.e._, his
divinity is destroyed.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE LX.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER
  CLXXXIII, _A. g._
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER
  CLXXXIV, _P. p._
]

[Illustration:

  CHAPTER CLXXXV, _L. a._
]

[Illustration: CHAPTER CLXXV. =Papyrus of Ani.=]

[Illustration: CHAPTER CLXXIV, _A. f._]

[Illustration: CHAPTER CLXXX, _L. a._]

[Illustration: CHAPTER CLXXXVI, _D. a._]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER CLXXIV.

 _Chapter of causing the Chu to come out of the great door in the sky._


It is read(1.) to thee by thy son (Horus).

The great ones tremble when they see the sword which is in thy hand,
when thou goest out of the Tuat.

Hail to thee, the wise one, created by Seb, born of Nut. The cycles of
the gods are at rest. Horus rests in his dwelling(2.), Tum rests in his
abode (?). All the gods of East and West rest in the great goddess(3.)
of the birth, between the arms of her who gave birth to the god.

When I am born I see, I recognize where I am, I have been raised on my
place. The order has been accomplished of her who hates sleep and
depression, and who stands in Utenet.

My bread comes from Pu, and I receive my form in Heliopolis. Horus, in
accordance with the command he had received from his father the lord of
clouds, Astes, raised him, and I have been raised by Tmu.

I am the great one. I come forth between the legs of the cycle of the
gods. I have been conceived by Sechet, and Shestet(4.) gave me birth to
be her star, Sothis, the first one, the great walker who brings Rā
through the sky every day.

I have come to my abode. I have united the two diadems. I shine like a
star. O ye flowers, the name of which is “the precious bunch,” I am the
lotus which cometh out of the holy earth; when I am plucked, I settle
myself at the nostrils of the Great Figure.

I have come out of the lake of flame, I have received justice instead of
evil. I am near the white cloth(5.), and I keep watch over the Uræi in
the night of the great flood of tears.(6.)

I shine like Nefertmu the lotus which is at the nostril of Rā when he
comes forth on the horizon every day, and the gods are purified by his
sight.

_N._ is triumphant among the _ka_, smiting the hearts through his great
wisdom. He is near the god, he is the Sau(7.) (the knowing one) at the
western (right) side of Rā.

I have come to my abode among the _ka_, uniting the hearts through my
great wisdom. I am Sau near the god, at the western side of Rā; my
sceptre (?) is in my hand. I am called the great favourite, as I am clad
in red garments. I am Sau, on the western side of Rā, with a stout heart
in the cave of Nu.

                                 NOTES.

This Chapter is already found in the pyramid of Unas (l. 379-399). Prof.
Erman (_Zeitschr._, XXXIII, p. 2) has made a special study of it, and
has pointed out that the title of this Chapter originates from a
misunderstanding of the word ⁂⁂⁂ which should be a star and not
a gate or a door. Were it not for the vignette, which represents the
deceased, the woman Muthotepet coming out of a door, we should
translate: “Chapter of the coming forth of the _Chu_ as a great star in
the sky”; in accordance with these words found in the course of the
chapter: “Shestet gave me birth to be her star, Sothis,” etc.

Two papyri only contain this Chapter, one in London and one in Paris.
The London text has a vignette with these words: “the coming out of the
door in the sky by....”

1. ⁂⁂⁂⁂ M. Maspero translates: ton fils t’a fait (le
sacrifice). The word ⁂ is employed here as in the rubric of Chapter
141, “to say, to speak.” This speech is a ceremonial act, one of the
⁂⁂⁂ done for the deceased.

2. We noticed before (Chapter 160, note 2) that ⁂ is a variant for
⁂ when applying to Tmu. Here it applies to Horus. The unknown word
⁂⁂⁂ being parallel, I give it conjecturally a similar sense.

3. ⁂ “the great one, the great goddess,” and its variants
⁂⁂⁂⁂ etc., occur frequently in the Book of the Dead, and
seem to be a name of the sky.

4. ⁂⁂ which is found in the papyrus, is clearly a mistake for the
name of the goddess _Shestet_, which we read in the text of Unas.

5. Perhaps a tent in which he will shelter the Uræi.

6. See note 1, Chapter 4, and _Life Work_, Vol. III, p. 46. I suppose it
means here a heavy rain.

7. In the pictures in the royal tombs the sun-god stands in his boat
between ⁂ and ⁂⁂. Here it is said that Sau is at the West of
Rā, meaning on his right side. Rā is spoken of here as if he were a
human being, turning towards the South as all Egyptians did. His west is
his right-hand side. Even now the Egyptian fellaheen in their language
do not often say right and left, they generally make use of the points
of the compass: west of thee, etc.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER CLXXV.

_Chapter of not dying a second death in the Netherworld._


O Thoth(1.)! What has become of the children of Nut? they have stirred
up hostilities, they have raised storms, they have committed iniquit,
they have raised rebellion, they have perpetrated murder, they have done
oppression, and thus have acted, the strong against the weak, in all
that they have done to me.

Grant, O Thoth, what Tmu hath decreed. Thou seest not the iniquities,
thou art not pained at their attacks upon the years, and their invasions
upon the months, because they have done their mischiefs in secret.

I am thy pallet, O Thoth, and I bring to thee thine inkstand; I am not
one of those who do mischief in secret. Let not mischief be done unto
me.

O Tmu! what is this place to which I have journeyed? for it is without
water and without air! It is all abyss, utter darkness, sheer
perplexity. One liveth here in peace of heart. There is no pleasure of
love here. Let there be granted to me glory instead of water, air and
pleasures of love; and peace of heart instead of bread and beer.

[Decree this, Tmu, that if I see thy face I shall not be pained by thy
sufferings(2.).... Tmu decrees; behold the great gods have given him
this mission, he will reign on his throne and he will inherit his throne
in the Isle of fire: and for thee I decree that the god may see him as
his second self, and that my face may see thy face.

My lord Tmu, what is the duration of my life? Thou art for eternities of
eternities, the duration of endless years; and behold I am going to
deface all I have done: this earth will become water, an inundation as
it was in the beginning. I will remain with Osiris, and I will make my
form like another serpent, whom no man will know, and no god will see.

It is good what I have done to Osiris, who is exalted above all the
gods. I have given him the power in the region of the Netherworld, and
his son Horus will inherit his throne in the Isle of flame. I will make
his throne in the boat of millions of (years).

Horus is well established on his seat in order that he may take
possession of his place of rest; also I send a soul to Sut in the West,
who is exalted above all gods; and I have caused his soul to be guarded
in the boat, so that he may feel reverential fear of the divine body
(Osiris).]

O my father Osiris! I have done for thee what thy father Rā did for
thee. Let me have increase upon earth, let me keep my dwelling place,
let my heir be vigorous, let my sepulchre flourish and my dependents
upon earth. Let all my adversaries be crushed to pieces with Selk’et
(the scorpion goddess) over their ruin. I am thy son, O my father Rā!
thou hast been the cause of this Life, Health and Strength. Horus is
established upon his throne. Grant that my duration of Life may be that
of one who attains beatitude.(3.)

                                 NOTES.

The translation and notes of this Chapter, except what is in brackets,
are Renouf’s work. They are taken from the introduction he published to
his edition of the papyrus of Ani (p. 16).

The vignette represents the deceased and his wife worshipping Thoth.

This Chapter is found in the papyrus of Ani, and at greater length in a
papyrus of the Museum of Leyden, from which it has been copied by
Naville into his edition.

The Leyden text is unfortunately very incomplete, both in the upper and
lower parts of the columns. The two texts differ very materially in some
of their readings, and will require considerable study before a
satisfactory translation can be given.

1. The deceased is evidently supposed to be just arrived in a place of
utter darkness and desolation, and expresses his feelings of distress to
Thoth in the opening address.

2. [The text of Leyden is much more complete. Owing probably to want of
space, the scribe of Ani has shortened his text. There the omissions are
so considerable that it is impossible to find a sense. I have often
adopted the reading of the Leyden papyrus in the translation of this
part of the chapter.

3. The remaining columns in the Leyden manuscript, although incomplete,
enable us to see that the deceased is assimilated throughout to Osiris,
as born again in his son Horus. There is a cry of adoration to him in
Sutenhenen, and exultation in En-aaref, the whole cycle of the gods is
filled with satisfaction at seeing him inherit his throne and rule over
the earth. Sut is filled with terror when he sees the change which has
taken place; the different generations of mankind, the past, the
present, and the future, are in obeisance. Mention is made of the
“Hoeing” and of the blood which flowed in Sutenhenen [an allusion to the
myth of the destruction of mankind] and of other particulars in
connection with Osiris. And the chapter is said to be recited over an
image of Horus made of lapis lazuli (or blue material) and placed at the
throat of the deceased. It is also to be recited in the Netherworld.

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER CLXXVI.

        _Chapter of not dying a second time in the Netherworld._


I execrate the land of the East. I do not go to the dungeon, for I have
not done those things which are forbidden by the gods.

For I have passed through the place of purification in the middle of the
Meskat;(1.) the inviolate god has given me his glorious attributes on
the day when the two Earths were united in the presence of the Master of
(all) things.

_He who knows this chapter is a mighty Chu in the Netherworld._

                                 NOTES.

A short Chapter found in one papyrus only, and consisting of a few
sentences taken from various chapters.

1. See Note 19, Chapter 17.

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER CLXXVII.

 _Chapter of raising the Chu, of vivifying his soul in the Netherworld._


O Nut, Nut, who created the father out of his earth(1.) and Horus after
him, who bound his wings as to a hawk and his feathers like Kemhesu,(2.)
who brought him his soul, and who perfected his words, who showed him
his abode in the presence of the stars, the occupiers of the sky, for he
is the great star of Nut.

Thou seest _N._ uttering words to the Glorified, for he is the great
form who will not rule (?) over them if thou art not among them. Thou
seest the head of _N._ as a _ba_(3.) (ram); his horns are like those of
a sacrificed victim, those of a black ram, born of the ewe who bare him,
and suckled by four sheep.

There came to thee Horus with blue eyes, do thou guard Horus with red
eyes in his sickness and in his wrath; let his soul not be opposed, let
his messengers come to him, and his quick runners(4.) hasten to him; let
them come on the west side, and one by one (?) march towards thee.

The god has said this: thy words are those of the father of the
gods,(5.) thy name will be triumphant before the gods; they exalt thee
and the cycle of the gods give thee their hands.

Said by the god to the father of the gods: take possession of the door
of the _ka_ on the horizon, let them throw open their gates; thou art
welcome to them, do thou prevail over them, let them advance towards the
god(6.) ... when they come out they raise their faces, they see him
before the great god Amsu[6] ... thy head, I have raised for thee thy
head, take possession of it ... his head has perished behind thee, thy
head will not perish and what thou hast done before men and gods will
not be destroyed.

                                 NOTES.

This Chapter is found in the pyramid of Unas (ll. 361-376), where the
text is not much better than in the Papyrus London 9900.

1. I believe this obscure expression means Osiris.

2. A form of Horus represented as a crouching hawk, with two feathers on
his head (Renouf, _Life Work_, Vol. III, p. 236).

3. Though ⁂ is written by a bird with a human head, it applies to
the soul represented by a ram. See vignettes to Chapter 85.

4. ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ evidently the word ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ of
the inscription of the “Destruction of mankind,” where it refers to
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ the messengers.

5. ⁂⁂⁂ means properly a hunter, a man of the field, which
would have no sense here. Unas reads ⁂⁂⁂⁂ “the divine
fathers.” Adopting the reading of Unas in the singular, I read the
father of the gods, probably Seb, who is mentioned a little further in
the text of the pyramid.

6. Lacunæ.

                  ------------------------------------




                           CHAPTER CLXXVIII.

 _Chapter of raising the body, of giving it eyes, of making it possess
         ears, of fixing its head, of putting it on its base._


Thou hast received the eye of Horus;(1.) thy table is a table of
offerings.

Hail, Hunnu, lift up thy heart to purify thy body; they have eaten the
eye of Horus, the olive of Heliopolis,(2.) they destroy (what is wrong)
in the body of Osiris.

(3.)The mouth of _N._ had been thirsty; but he will never hunger (any
more); _N._ will never thirst; for Chas delivers him and does away with
hunger.

O you who fill the vases, you chiefs who distribute bread and cakes, and
who have charge of the waterflood; there was ordered for _N._ bread and
beer, Rā himself ordered them; he ordered them to those who fill the
year with plenty; they seize them (the gifts) and they give him his
wheat, his barley, his loaves, for he is the great bull.

Grant to _N._ the charge of the five loaves in the funerary chapel;
there are three in heaven for Rā, there are two on earth for the cycle
of the gods, and Nu sees them.

O, Rā, be gracious to _N._ in this happy day when _N._ joined Shu and
Isis, and when he was united to (Nekhebit);(4.) they give bread and beer
to _N._, and they do all the things good and pure in this happy day, the
things of Tum, bringing him the things of the eye of Horus ... whenever
he arrives to see the god.

Thou takest possession of water, and thou marchest towards the altar of
Sashert: four measures of water, as was commanded by Osiris to _N._ Shu
has handed over his wealth to _N._; they are thy bread and thy beer.

Awake, lofty judge; awake, thou sleeper; awake from thy ... thy
offerings are brought before Thoth and Horus, who comes out from the
Nile, and Apuat who comes out of Asert.

It is pure, the mouth of _N._; the cycle of the gods offers incense to
the mouth of _N._ His mouth is pure verily, and his tongue in his mouth,
for _N._ hates filth, he is washed from impurity as Sut is washed in the
city of the Rehui when he goes with Thoth to heaven.

Feed _N._ with you; let him eat what you eat, drink as you drink, sit as
you sit, be mighty as you are mighty, navigate as you navigate. The tent
of _N._ is woven in the field of Aarru, his running water is in the
Garden of Hotepit. Offerings are made to him among the gods; the drink
of _N._ is the wine of Rā.

He goes round the sky like Rā, he travels over the sky like Thoth. _N._
execrates hunger, he does not eat (feel) it, he execrates thirst. _N._
has received bread from the lord of eternity.

He ordered that _N._ should be conceived in the night and born in the
morning, close to the follower of Rā, before the morning star.

_N._ was conceived of _N._ and born of _N._, he brings you the loaves
which he found in the pupil of the eye of Horus, on the bough of the
_tennu_ tree.

When he came, Khenta Amenta brought him the victuals and the offerings
of Horus in his abodes where he lives of them. _N._ lives of them; as
Horus drinks, _N._ drinks; his food is on the altar of Sashert. _N._ is
welcome to Anubis on his mountain.

Hail, _N._, thy figure is that which thou hadst on earth, thou art
living and renewed every day. Thy face is unveiled, and thou seest the
lord of the horizon; he gives bread to _N._ at his hour of the day and
at his appointed time in the night. Horus has avenged thee, he has
smashed the jawbones of thy enemies, he has smitten the violent one at
the door of his fortress.

Hail, _N._, thine enemies are no more, in the great hall the scales are
right concerning thee, thou makest long strides like Osiris(5.) the lord
of the arrivals in the Amenta. He arrives when he likes, he sees the
great god in his creations, life is given to his nostrils, he is
triumphant over his enemies.

Hail, _N._ Thou hatest falsehood, thou propitiatest the lord of (all)
things in the night of “stopping the tears,” thou receivest sweet life
from the mouth of the cycle of the gods, and Thoth is satisfied in
giving thee victory over thine enemies.

Nut spreads her wings over thee in her name of the veil of the sky, she
giveth thee to be in the following of the great god, thine enemies are
no more. She delivers thee of all evil things in her name of
Chnumeturit, for she is the great one among her children.

O chief of the hours, in front of Rā, make way for _N._ that he may
arrive into the circle of Osiris, the living lord of the two earths, who
lives eternally.

_N._ is in the following of Nefertmu, he is the lotus at the nostrils of
Rā ... he is pure, in the presence of the gods; he sees Rā eternally.

                                 NOTES.

This Chapter, taken from London 9900, is found complete in the pyramid
of Unas (l. 166 ff.). Four other pyramids, those of Teta, Pepi I,
Merenrā and Pepi II contain the greatest part of it; as also does a
stele of the XIIth Dynasty found in Abydos, and belonging to a man
called Nehi. Hatshepsu had it copied on both sides of the chamber of
offering specially dedicated to her (_Deir el Bahari_, Vol. IV, pl.
CIX-XIII and p. 8). In the pyramids as well as at the temple this text
is connected with offerings. The representation in the temple may be
considered as the vignette to this chapter. We see there the queen
sitting before an altar of offerings called ⁂⁂.

1. ⁂⁂ The eye of Horus, a generic term applied to a great number
of offerings.

2. There is much confusion in the first lines of this chapter.

3. Text evidently incorrect.

4. Taken from Unas.

5. I read ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ (Lepsius, _Todt._, 148, 3, title to
Chapter 180), to make long strides, means to go about freely.

6. Formula inscribed on the coffin of King Mycerinus, in the British
Museum, and on many coffins of the New Empire, especially under the
Saites.

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER CLXXIX.

 _Chapter of coming forth when going out of yesterday (1.) and coming in
          the (present) day, being equipped by one’s own hands._


I am raised from yesterday, I come to-day, I come out of my own
creations.

I am the sap coming out of its tree, I am the flow coming out of its
form; for I stand before the lord of the white crown, I am gracious; my
words are well established before the lord of the red crown, he who
avenges(2.) his eye.

I died yesterday, but I come to-day;(3.) I made my way towards the
doorkeeper of the great god; I come forth by day against my enemy; I
triumph over him for ever. He is given me, and he will not be rescued
from my hand; he will dwindle away in my possession, before the great
circle of gods in the Netherworld.

I have been given the diadem of the great goddess which is on the head
of the shadow, and on the figure of the living gods. I have made my way
... my enemy is brought to me; he is given me and he will not be rescued
from my hand; he will dwindle away in my possession, before the circle
of gods of Osiris in his festival, when the inhabitants of the Amenta
...(4.) in his name of....

I am the lord of the red ones in the day of the births, I am the master
of the sword, it will not be taken away from me.

I am in my bower, I have the sweet juice from my palm trees; they bring
me what is agreeable to my heart.

I come forth in the day against this my enemy; when he is brought to me
I triumph over him, he will not be rescued from my hand, he will dwindle
away in my possession in the presence of the great circle of gods in
Ta-tsert, and the queen of the souls, the most mighty.

I rest in the garden of Hotepit, according to the commands of the lords
of Cherāba, my figure is high in the presence of the most mighty; I am
strong, I rest in the isles of the garden of Aarru.

                                 NOTES.

This Chapter is found in two papyri only: London 9900 _Aa_, and the
papyrus of _Nu_. This last text differs considerably from the first at
the end of the chapter. The translation is made from _Aa_, with
occasional references to _Nu_.

1. The explanation of this curious expression
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ is given by the words of Nu
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ “I died yesterday, but I
come to-day.” ⁂⁂ yesterday is the past, is death; whereas
⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂ this day, the present day, is life. Leaving what
has been, and coming to what is, is only a figure meaning resurrection
after death.

2. I have kept Renouf’s translation, although I consider it is
erroneous. The word ⁂⁂⁂, ⁂⁂ means _reconstitute_,
_restore_, and not avenge. The common expression, Horus the avenger of
his father, should be translated: “Horus who reconstitutes the body of
his father” torn to pieces by Sut.

3. These words are taken from the text of Nu.

4. In both papyri there are words omitted here.

                  ------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER CLXXX.

_Chapter of coming forth by day, of giving praise to Rā in the Amenta,
  of paying homage to the inhabitants of the Tuat, of opening the way to
  the mighty soul in the Netherworld, of letting him walk, lengthen his
  strides, and go in and out in the Netherworld; and take the form of a
  living soul._


Rā sets as Osiris with all the splendour of the Glorified and of the
gods of the Amenta; for he is the one, the marvellous in the Tuat, the
exalted soul in the Netherworld, Unneferu who exists for ever and
eternally.

Hail to thee in the Tuat, thy son Horus rests in thee, thou speakest thy
words to him; grant him that he may be resplendent before the
inhabitants of the Tuat, that he may be the great star; that he may
bring what is his to the Tuat and may travel in it, he, the son of Rā
proceeding from Tmu.

Hail to thee in the Tuat, god seated upon his throne, who holdest thy
sceptre _hik_, king of the Tuat and lord of Acherta, great prince
wearing the double diadem, great god who hides his dwelling, lord of
wisdom, chief of his circle of gods.

Hail to thee in the Tuat, praises also to what is in thee;(1.) hail to
thee in the Tuat, the weeping gods cut their hair in thy honour, they
clap their hands, they implore thee, they pray thee, they weep before
thee. Thy soul rejoices and thy body is glorious.

It is exalted, the soul of Rā in the Amenta, his body is blessed there;
the powers praise him in the bounds of the Tuat, Teb Temt(2.) who rests
in his covering.

Hail, Osiris, I am the servant of thy temple, the inhabitant of thy
divine dwelling, thou speakest to me thy words; give me to shine before
the inhabitants of the Tuat like the great star who brings what is his
to the Tuat, who journeys in it, he the son of Rā, proceeding from Tmu.

I rest in the Tuat, I am the master of the dusk, I enter in there and I
come out. The arms of Tatunen receive me, the blessed lift me up.
Stretch your arms towards me, for I know your gates, (?) guide me.
Praise me, ye blessed ones, praise me, rejoice in me as in Rā, praise me
like Osiris, for I have placed before you your offerings and you take
possession of your victuals, according to the orders Rā gave me.

I am his favourite, I am his heir upon the earth. I have arrived.

Ye blessed ones grant that I may enter the Tuat, open me the entrance to
the good Amenta. I have presented the sceptre to _sahu_, and the
_nemmes_(3.) to him whose name is hidden.

Look at me, ye blessed ones, divine guides in the Tuat; grant that I may
receive thy glory, that I may shine like the god of mysteries; deliver
me from the gods of the pillory, who fasten to their posts; do not bind
me to your posts, do never send me to the place of destruction. I am the
heir of Osiris, I receive the _nemmes_ in the Tuat.

Look at me, I shine like one who proceeds from you, I become like him
who (praises) his father, and who extols him.

Look at me, rejoice in me, grant that I may be exalted, that I may
become like him who destroys his forms; open the way to my soul, set me
on your pedestals; grant that I may rest in the good Amenta, show me my
dwelling in the midst of you, open for me your ways, unfasten the bolts.

O Rā, who guides this earth, for thou art guiding the powers and
following the course of the gods; I am the guardian of his door who tows
the navigating gods.

I am the only one, the guardian of his door, he who puts the gods in
their abodes.

I am on my pedestal in the Tuat. I am the possessor among possessors; I
am at the far end of the Tuat.

I am the blessed one in the Acherta, and I make my resting place in the
Amenta, among the powers and among the gods.

I am the favourite of Rā; I am the mysterious Bennu who enters in peace
in the Tuat and goes out of Nut in peace.

I am the lord of the thrones(4.) above, traversing the horizon in the
train of Rā; the offerings for me are in the sky in the field of Rā, and
my portion on earth in the garden of Aarru; I journey in the Tuat like
Rā; I weigh the words like Thoth, I march as I will, I hasten in my
course like Sahu the mysterious one, and I am born as the two gods.

I am the chief of the bearers of offerings to the gods of the Tuat, who
gives offerings to the Glorified. I am the brave one who strikes his
enemies.

O ye gods, O ye Glorified who precede Rā, and who escort his soul, tow
me as you tow him, in the same way as you conduct Rā and tow those in
the sky. I am the lofty power in the Amenta.

                                 NOTES.

The papyri give us four versions of this Chapter. Two of them are in
London 9900 _Aa_, but as they are both copied from the wrong side, they
are of little use. Each of them had its own title; one was, “the
worshipping of Rā in the good Amenta, the praising of the inhabitants of
the Tuat,” and the other, “chapter of towing (the gods)”; the two other
copies are, one in a papyrus in Paris and the other at Leyden.

This Chapter does not properly belong to the Book of the Dead. It is
part of a book engraved at the entrance of nearly all the tombs of the
kings, the so-called “Litany of the Sun.” This chapter is taken from the
end of the book. The various paragraphs are not always in the same order
as in the monumental text. There are abridgments and many omissions,
which in the translation have been filled up from the text in the tombs.

The papyrus of Leyden (_La_) has a vignette representing the deceased
worshipping two gods.

1. Words taken from the text in the tombs of the kings.

2. The texts in the tomb mention here the god ⁂⁂⁂ _Temt_, who
occurs there frequently, and who is quite unknown in the Book of the
Dead. This god is often spoken of as being in a ⁂⁂⁂, a kind of
oval case. The text here reads ⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂⁂, which has
no meaning.

3. The head-dress ⁂ worn by the sphinxes.

4. The tombs read here ⁂⁂.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE LXI.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration: CHAPTER CLXXXI, _L. a._]

[Illustration: CHAPTER CLXXXII, _A. t._]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER CLXXXI.

_Chapter of arriving before the Divine circle of Osiris and before the
  gods, the guides in the Tuat, before the guards of their halls,(1.)
  the heralds of their gates and the doorkeepers of their pylons in the
  Amenta, and of taking the form of a living soul and praising Osiris
  the lord of his circle of gods._


Hail to thee, Chenta Amenta, Unneferu, lord of Tatsert; thou art shining
like Rā. He himself comes to see thee and he rejoices in seeing thy
beauties. His disk is thy disk, his rays are thy rays, his diadem is thy
diadem, his height is thy height, his splendour is thy splendour, his
beauties are thy beauties, his might is thy might, his odour is thy
odour. His width is thy width, his abode is thy abode, his throne is thy
throne, his descendence is thy descendence, his judgment is thy
judgment, his Ament is thy Ament; his wealth is thy wealth, his duration
is thy duration, his creations are thy creations; such as he is such art
thou,(2.) such as thou art such is he.

He shall not die, thou wilt not die; if he will not triumph over his
enemies, thou wilt not triumph over his enemies; no evil things will
happen to him, no evil things will happen to thee for ever and ever.

Hail, Osiris, son of Nut, lord of horns, wearing the high _atef_ crown,
to whom the _urer_ diadem and the _hik_ sceptre has been given in the
presence of the cycle of the gods. Tum has raised the fear of his might
in the hearts of mankind, of the gods, the Glorified and the dead; the
royal power has been given him in Heliopolis; he is the great forms in
Tattu, the lord of fear in his two abodes, the very brave one in Restau,
he whose memory is pleasant in the palace, the very brilliant in Abydos.
It has been given him to triumph before the whole cycle of the gods; he
is mighty more than the great powers; the fear of him is over the whole
earth.

The(3.) great ones stand on their shrines before him, the prince of the
gods of the Tuat, the great power of the sky, the lord of the living,
and the king of those who are therein. Thousands glorify him in Cherāba,
the future ones rejoice in him. He receives the choicest meat offerings
in the upper abodes; haunches are presented to him in Memphis, the
festival of the Eve’s provender is celebrated to him in Sechem, he is
the great, the mighty one.

Thy son Horus avenges thee, he destroys all that is wrong in thee; he
has fastened to thee thy flesh, he has set thy limbs and joined thy
bones; he has brought thee....(4.) Arise, Osiris, thy hands have been
given thee, stand up living for ever.

Seb made a mark(5.) on thy mouth; the great cycle of the gods protect
thee.... They come with thee towards the entrance of the hall of the
Tuat. Thy mother Nut stretches her hand behind thee, she protects thee,
she doubles her care for thee(4) ... of the children. The two sisters
Isis and Nephthys come to thee; they fill thee with life health and
strength, and all the joy which they possess.

... in thee, because of thee. They gather for thee all kind of good
things within thy arms. The gods, the lords of the _ka_, come near thee;
as they praise thee for ever.

Happy art thou, Osiris, thou shinest brilliantly, thou art powerful;
thou art glorified. Thy attributes have been fixed to thee; thou art
like Anubis. Rā rejoiceth in thee, he is bound to thy beauty.

Thou sittest on thy holy seat. Seb procures for thee what thou desirest
to receive, it is on thy hands in the Amenta.

Thou navigatest through the sky every day, thou leadest him (Rā) to his
mother Nut, where he sits living in the Amenta, in the boat of Rā, every
day. Thou art with Horus in order that the protection of Rā may be
behind thee; and the glorious power of Thoth may cling to thee and the
health of Isis be within thy limbs.

I have come to thee, lord of Ta-tsert, Osiris Chenta Amenta, Unneferu,
who lasts eternally and for ever; my heart is right; my hands are pure;
I have brought good things to my lord and offerings to him who made
them. I have come from afar to your abodes. I have done a good thing on
earth, I have struck for thee thy enemies like bulls, and I have
slaughtered them like victims, I have made them to fall down on their
faces before thee.

I am pure, thou art pure. I have purified thyself for thee, in thy
festival, I have dressed geese for thee on thy altar, for thy soul, for
thy Form and for the gods and goddesses who follow thee.

_Whoever knows this book, no evil thing can have mastery over him; he is
not driven away from the doors of the Tuat; when he goes in and out, he
receives bread and beer and all good things before the inhabitants of
the Tuat._

                                 NOTES.

This Chapter is found in two papyri: one at Leyden, and one at Naples.
Its title begins like that of Chapter 124. The first paragraphs are
translated from the papyrus at Leyden, which stops suddenly, because the
space allotted to the text, below the vignette, came to an end. From
there the scribe passes over to the rubric.

1. _See_ note to Chapter 144.

2. _See_ note 5, Chapter 144.

3. The following is taken from the papyrus at Naples.

4. Lacunæ.

5. This is part of the funereal ceremonies. ⁂⁂⁂⁂ is to
touch the mouth or make a mark on it with the instrument called
⁂⁂⁂ (Schiaparelli, _Libro dei Funerali_, Vol. I, p. 139).

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER CLXXXII.


_Book of vivifying(1.) Osiris, of giving air to him whose heart is
motionless, through the action of Thoth, who repels the enemies of
Osiris who come there in his form(2.) ... as protector, saviour,
defender in the Netherworld._

_It is said by Thoth himself, so that the morning light may shine on him
(Osiris) every day._

I am Thoth, the perfect scribe, whose hands are pure, who opposes every
evil deed, who writes justice and who execrates every wrong, he who is
the writing reed of the Inviolate god, the lord of laws, whose words are
written and whose words have dominion over the two earths.

I am the lord of justice, the witness of right before the gods; I direct
the words so as to make the wronged victorious. I have dispelled
darkness, and driven away the storm. I have given the sweet breaths of
the North to Osiris when he comes out of the womb which bare him. I give
Rā to be setting as Osiris and Osiris to be setting as Rā. I give him to
enter the mysterious cave in order to revive the heart of him whose
heart is motionless, the exalted soul which is in the Amenta.

Hail, acclamations to thee, god whose heart is motionless, Unneferu, the
son of Nut. I am Thoth, the favourite of Rā, the very brave, who is
beneficent to his father; the great magician in the boat of millions (of
years); the lord of laws, who pacifies the two earths by the power of
his wisdom ... who drives away enmity and dispels quarrels, who does
what is pleasing to Rā in his shrine.

I am Thoth, who giveth Osiris victory over his enemies; I am Thoth, who
prepares to-morrow and who foresees what will come afterwards; his
action is not vain when he settles what is in the sky, the earth and the
Tuat, and when he gives life to the future ones.

I give breath to the hidden ones by the virtue of my speech. Osiris is
triumphant against his enemies.

I have come to the lord of Ta-tsert, Osiris the bull of the Amenta, who
lasts forever. I give an eternal protection to thy limbs; I have come
bearing the amulet in my hand; my protection is active every day.

The living charm is behind him, behind this god, whose _ka_ is glorious,
the king of the Tuat, the prince of the Amenta, who takes hold of the
sky, triumphantly, on whom the _atef_ crown is established, who shines
with the white diadem, who has seized the hook and the flail; mighty is
his soul, the great one of the _urer_ crown; who has united all the
gods, the love of him penetrates their bodies, Unneferu who lasts for
ever and eternally.

Hail to thee, Chenta Amenta, who giveth birth to all human beings a
second time, who is renewed in an instant, who is better than those who
were before. Thy son Horus establishes thee on the pedestal of Tmu; thy
face is perfect, Unneferu.

Arise, bull of the Amenta, thou art established, well established in the
womb of Nut; she replenishes thee (with life and health) when thou
comest out of her. Thy heart is well established on its stands and thy
whole heart as at the beginning. Thy nose is vivified with the breath of
life; thou art living, renewed, made young like Rā every day, thou art
great and triumphant, Osiris, who has been revived.

I am Thoth, I have calmed Horus, I have pacified the Rehiu in their
moment of storm. I have come, I have washed away the Red ones; I have
calmed down the riotous, and I have struck him with (?) all kinds of
evil things.

I am Thoth, I have celebrated the festival of Eve’s provender in Sechem.
I am Thoth, I come every day from Pu Tepu, I have directed the
offerings, I have given cakes to the glorious ones who stretched forth
their hands. I have avenged the arm of Osiris, I have embalmed it. I
have made sweet its fragrance like good perfumes.

I am Thoth, I come every day to Cherāba; I fastened the tackle; I let
the boat go: I brought it from East to West. I am higher on my pedestal
than any god, for my name is he who is high on his pedestal. I opened
the good roads in my name of Apuatu, I give thee acclamations, and I
throw myself down on the earth before Osiris Unneferu the eternal, the
everlasting.

                                 NOTES.

Chapters 182 and 183 are hymns to Osiris very like each other, supposed
to be pronounced by Thoth himself. Occasionally it is difficult to
distinguish whether the words are spoken by the god or the deceased.

Chapter 182 is taken from Papyrus 10010 in London.

The vignette represents the mummy on the funeral bed, surrounded by
several gods and genii.

1. See note 2, Chapter 154.

2. A word is omitted there.

                  ------------------------------------




                           CHAPTER CLXXXIII.

_Adoration to Osiris, giving him praise, bowing down before Unneferu,
  falling on one’s face before the lord of Ta-tsert, and exalting him
  who is on his sand._


I have come to thee, son of Nut, Osiris, prince everlasting. I am in the
train of Thoth, I rejoice in all that he has done.

He brings thee sweet breezes to thy nose, the breath of life to thy
beautiful face, the wind coming out of Tmu to thy nostrils, lord of
Ta-tsert.

He grants that the morning light shine on thy body, he illuminateth thy
path with his rays, he removeth all that is wrong in thy body by the
virtue of his speech. He appeases the two gods, the two brothers, he
drives away anger and quarrel, and he made the two Rehti, the two
sisters, gracious unto thee, so that the two earths may be at peace
before thee; he removes the displeasure out of their hearts, so that one
embraces the other.

Thy son Horus is triumphant before the whole cycle of gods; he has
received the royal power on the earth, and his dominion over the whole
earth; the throne of Seb has been imparted to him; the high dignity of
Tmu is kept in record as his possession, engraved on a brick of iron, as
was ordered by thy father Tatunen in his sanctuary.

(This god) giveth thee to join him on the firmament, when he raiseth
water on the mountains in order to make growth come forth on the
mountains, and all growth spring out of the earth; he brings forth all
products on water and on land.

Thou hast handed over to thy son Horus all the gods of Heaven and the
gods of earth, they are his servants at his gates, and all that he has
commanded is before them; they fulfil it at once; thy heart is
satisfied, thy heart, lord of the gods, is overjoyed because of it.

Egypt and the desert are at peace; they are the vassals of thy royal
diadem; the temples and the cities are well ordered in their places; the
cities and the provinces are his possession according to their names,
they bring to thee tributes of offerings, and they make libations to thy
name for ever. Thou art called upon, and thy name is praised, thy _ka_
is gratified by funereal meals.

The Glorified who are in thy following sprinkle water on thy food by the
side of the dead souls in this land. All thy thoughts are excellent like
those of him who was at the beginning.

Be crowned, son of Nut, as the Inviolate god is crowned; thou art
living, thou art revived, thou art renewed, thou art perfect. Thy father
Rā giveth health to all thy limbs, thy divine circle giveth thee praise.
Isis is with thee, she will never leave thee before all thy enemies are
struck down.

All the lands praise thy beauties like Rā when he rises every morning;
thou art crowned like him who is high on his pedestal, thy beauties are
exalted, thy strides are lengthened; thou hast received the royal power
of Seb, thy father who creates thy beauties; thy mother gave existence
to thy limbs, Nut who bare the gods bare thee to be the chief of the
five gods. The white crown of the South is placed on thy head; thou
seizest the hook and the flail. When thou wast still in the womb, before
thou didst appear on earth, thou wast crowned to be lord of the two
earths, the _atef_ crown of Rā was on thy head.

The gods come to thee, bowing down, the fear of thee possesses them;
they see thee with the might of Rā, and the valour of thy majesty fills
their hearts.

Life is with thee, abundance is attached to thee. I offer Maat before
thee; grant that I may be in the train of thy majesty like one who is on
the earth. May thy name be called upon, may it be found among the just
ones.

I have come to the city of this god, to the city of god, to the region
of old time; my soul, my _ka_, my Chu are in this land. The god of it is
the lord of justice, the lord of abundance, the great and the venerable
one, who is towed through the whole earth; he journeys to the South in
his boat, and to the North driven by the winds, and his oars, to be
entertained with gifts according to the command of the god, the lord of
peace therein, who left me free of care. The god therein rejoices in him
who practices justice; he grants an old age to him who has done so; he
is beloved, and the end of it is a good burial and a sepulture in
Ta-tsert.

I have come to thee; my hands bring Maāt, my heart does not contain any
falsehood, I offer thee Maāt before thy face, I know her; I swear by
her; I have done no evil thing on earth; I have never wronged a man of
his property. I am Thoth, the perfect and pure writer; my hands are
pure. I have put away all evil things; I write justice and I hate evil;
for I am the writing-reed of the Inviolate god, who utters his words,
and whose words are written in the two earths.

I am Thoth, the lord of justice, who giveth victory to him who is
injured and who taketh the defense of the oppressed, of him who is
wronged in his property. I have dispelled darkness; I have driven away
the storm; I have given air to Unneferu, and the sweet breezes of the
North when he comes out of the womb of his mother. I have given him to
enter into the mysterious cave where is revived the heart of the god
whose heart is motionless, Unneferu, the son of Nut, the victorious.

                                 NOTE.

This hymn is taken from the papyrus of Unneferu, in London. See note 1
in Chapter 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

PLATE LXII.

                           BOOK OF THE DEAD.

[Illustration: CHAPTER CLXXXV, _P. d._]


[Illustration: CHAPTER CLXXXVI. =Papyrus of Ani.=]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER CLXXXIV.
                    _Chapter of being near Osiris._


There is not much more than the vignette left. Only two or three words
remain. They are taken from a papyrus in Paris.

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER CLXXXV.

_Giving praise to Osiris, falling on the earth before the lord of
  eternity; propitiating the god with what he loves, speaking the truth,
  the lord of which is not known._


Hail to thee, venerable god, great and beneficent prince of eternity, in
his abode in the Sektit boat. Acclamations are given him in the sky and
on earth; he is exalted by the past and present. Great is the fear he
inspires in the hearts of men, of the Glorified and of the dead. His
soul was given him in Tattu, his might in Heracleopolis, his image in
Heliopolis, and his power over forms(1.) in the double sanctuary.

I have come to thee; my heart holds right, my heart contains no
falsehood. Give me to be among the living, to navigate up and down in
thy train.

                                 NOTES.

I have given No. 185 to a hymn to Osiris, with which many papyri begin,
but which occasionally comes just before the representation of the cow
in the West. There seems to have been no canonical text for that hymn,
in which the writer was left to follow his imagination.

The hymn here given is one of the most complete. It is taken from the
papyrus of Sutimes in Paris.

The vignette represents always Osiris in a shrine, with worshippers
before him.

1. ⁂⁂⁂⁂, litt., “his greatness of forms.” I suppose it means
his power of taking all the forms he likes.

                  ------------------------------------




                            CHAPTER CLXXXVI.

    _Adoration to Hathor, the lady of the West, falling down before
                               Mehurit._


I have come to thee, to see thy beauties, give me to be at the head of
thy followers and among thy divine attendants.

                                 NOTES.

A great many papyri end with a picture representing Hathor of the West,
in company of the goddess Thueris coming out of the mountain where the
burial is to take place. The text, which is generally very corrupt, as
if the writer had neglected the words for the picture, is an adoration
to Hathor, which varies in its form.

The text here translated is taken from a papyrus at Leyden.

The vignette is taken from the papyrus of Ani.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                           Transcriber’s Note

There are sixty two plates, some spanning facing pages. They were not
bound in strict sequential order. They were not considered in the
pagination. Since they are not available in this medium, the captions
have been shifted to avoid falling with paragraphs.

Please note that Chapter CX, appearing at pp 193-195 in the orginal, is
out of sequence with Chapters CXI-CXVI.

At 63.14, the Western Syriac word ⁂ is rendered as ܐܷܠܴ.

The text of each chapter is glossed with chapter endnotes. The scheme
was not cleanly followed. Fortunately, each note repeats a phrase in the
text, so the references can usually be traced.

 The reference to Chapter 41, note 8 is wrong, and there is no other
 obvious note.
 The identifier for Note 5 on p. 81 was missing, and has been restored.
 The reference to “Lord of the One Face” (Note 5 on p. 133) has been
 restored to the appropriate place.
 In the summary note to Chapter 22 on p. 61, there is an apparent
 reference ‘(2)’, for which there is no obvious referent. It is
 retained, but mentioned below.
 In the Notes for Chapter 46 on p. 102, there is a reference to note 6
 of Chapter 124, which does not exist.
 The numbering of notes in Chapter 64 was confused. The reference to
 note 15 was missing, and has been added. There were two note 21’s and a
 repeated reference to note 23. These have been resequenced.
 There is a reference to note 6 in Chapter 72 for which there is no
 corresponding note.
 The reference to note 5 in Chapter 112 was missing and, based on the
 subject of the note, has been placed after the final word on p. 184.
 At 218.21, a spurious reference to a note 49 has been added, causing
 the numbering of the final 6 references to be off by one. The reference
 is removed, and the numbering resequenced.
 The reference to note 4 in Chapter 144 was missing and has been placed
 after the phrase “receives the saying” at line 288.9.
 The reference to note 2 in Chapter 176 was missing and has been placed
 after the phrase “flame born” at line 340.8.
 Note 6 of Chapter 176 has no reference in the text.

The singular and plural names ‘Uræus’ and ‘Uræi’ usually appear with the
‘æ’ ligature, but twice each as ‘Uraeus’ or ‘Uraei’. The ligature
version has been adopted, for the sake of text searches, as noted below.

The proper name ‘Maāt’ which appears more than fifty times, is spelled a
handful of times without the macron on the second ‘a’ later in the text
(pp. 336, 344, 353, 374x4). These have been amended

Those errors deemed most likely to be the printer’s have been corrected,
and are noted here. The references are to the page and line in the
original.

  2.23     let him hear as you[r] hear                    Removed.
  47.20    according to the different authorit[i]es       Inserted.
  55.31    It is synonymous (_cf._ chapter 41, note 8)    _sic_
  57.17    “the measuring line used by builders,[”]       Added.
  61.23    from the coffin[(2)] of Queen Mentuhotep       _sic_
  72.24    of the Living[./?]                             Replaced.
  74.27    and convey it to Neh[a/e]bkau.                 Replaced.
  83.27    influencing the breathing[.]                   Added.
  92.60    those of the Living Ur[ae/æ]i                  Replaced.
  97.11    I am [t]he Babe                                Restored.
  102.22   (chapter [124, 6])                             _sic_
  123.10   [‘/“]The great Extender,”                      Replaced.
  127.26   when they close togethe[r]                     Restored.
  136.7    The Symb[e/o]l of Life                         Replaced.
  136.22   join my two hands together[(6)]                _sic_
  138.8    the represen[s/t]ations of the Psychostasia?   Replaced.
  140.28   for ever[,/.] Make thou                        Replaced.
  143.25   for the sei[z/s]in of his inheritance          Replaced.
  151.1    Let me sit wher[e]ever it pleaseth me.         Removed.
  151.29   of those seven Ur[ae/æ]us deities              Replaced.
  154.15   The Ur[ae/æ]us divinities are my body.         Replaced.
  157.9    a common noun signi[f]ying an earth-worm       Inserted.
  167.3    “the Horizon[”]                                Removed.
  168.7    [“]Bearer of the Great one whilst she passeth” Added.
  168.12   [“]Made of the hide of Mnevis                  Added.
  180.2    things which [‘]spring forth’ ‘come to light.’ Removed.
  198.32   [-/‘]drink made from the fruit of the creeper’ Replaced.
  205.11   the mystical, not the geograp[/h]ical>, Abydos Inserted.
  208.10   in the lands there of the Fenchu[:/.]          Replaced.
  214.8    the Master of the two Ur[ae/æ]                 Replaced.
  218.28   saith the right side[(49)]                     Removed.
  219.26   the Two Worlds[)].                             Removed.
  222.19   where Rā riseth[’]                             Added.
  224.2    and one to[ to] the Right side                 Removed.
  227.35   Isis and Nephthys.[”]                          Added.
  230.7    Absalom had his brother Amnon assas[s]inated   Added.
  230.34   contradicted by no[t]orious evidence           Restored.
  246.31   but ‘the Strong one,[’]                        Added.
  247.30.1 he tell[s] us                                  Removed.
  247.30.2 (_Zeit[s]chr._, 1873, p. 3)                    Inserted.
  249.32   the difference of terms[.]                     Added.
  255.25   his throne.[’/”]                               Replaced.
  259.20   translated ‘princes,’ ‘officers,[’]            Added.
  260.28   [“]They shall offer                            Added.
  267.13   Bonomi’s _Sarc[o]ph._                          Inserted.
  272.24   and the Hammemit in Cherāba.[”]                Added.
  273.8    be used synon[o/y]mously                       Replaced.
  276.25   written in the Nebseni pap[ry/yr]us            Transposed.
  277.12   [o/O]h thou of the potent Lock                 Replaced.
  277.21   is of the femin[i]ne gender.                   Inserted.
  278.19   certainly corrupt and un[in]telligible.        Inserted.
  286.8    of which is the papyrus[ is] _Nu_              Removed.
  290.1    in his introduct[i]on to the Papyrus of Ani    Inserted.
  292.1    ‘the dark sky[,] the black sky.’               Added.
  292.27   The name of the doorkeeper is[;/:] the bull.   Replaced.
  318.26   Therefor[e] one may speak                      Added.
  349.34   th[e]y feet are firm every day                 Removed.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EGYPTIAN BOOK OF THE DEAD ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of The admiral's walk, by Sam Merwin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The admiral's walk

Author: Sam Merwin

Release Date: December 17, 2022 [eBook #69565]

Language: English

Produced by: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADMIRAL'S WALK ***





                          THE ADMIRAL'S WALK

                          By SAM MERWIN, JR.

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                Thrilling Wonder Stories December 1947.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


The thin little man in the blue coat with the tarnished gold braid sat
at the desk in his cabin and wished for fatigue to overwhelm him. He
was tired, tired with a fatigue which had been creeping slowly upon him
in recent years--and had come on apace in the past few months. Now it
was in his very bones.

It was the cold fatigue of an old man--and he was far from old as the
world counted years.

He eyed the gleaming bottle of black West Indian rum that stood in its
barricaded tray on the table to his left, and his blue eyes lit with a
gleam of purpose. Forgetfulness, even sleep, lay in its turbid depths.

But such sleep was not for him with the night already so far spent. The
morrow lay close upon him, the morrow toward which his every faculty
had been sternly impelled for so many long and unrewarding months. And
behind those months lay the many weary years.

Actually, until the issue was joined, there was little he could do. To
show himself on deck would reveal a nervousness that might result in a
disastrous echo among the men who relied upon him for victory.

His senses hyper-acute, he heard the slap of brine against the
waterline, its rhythm never twice the same, yet never varied, so that a
man could pick out the difference. He watched idly as the swaying cabin
lamp made the shadow of the bottle on the table dance a minuet.

All around him was the wakeful dormancy of a mighty ship asleep--as
other ships lay in similar unreal quiescence fore and aft, ships whose
commanders were bound by oath to obey his every whim, bound by oath and
the fealty his reputation inspired.

It was terrible to hold supreme command on the eve of battle; terrible
and frightening. The light supper he had eaten lay heavy on his stomach.

Despite the battles he had fought, the victories he had won, such
malaise had never failed to visit him when action loomed close. It was
twenty-five years since he had first felt it.

Then he had led a malaria-ridden crew against the well-fortified
defenses of San Juan in Nicaragua. It was a comparatively minor
mission, one suited to a twenty-two-year-old commander on his first
independent assignment. He had thought never again to be troubled with
it once the victory was won.

But it had been present fifteen years later when the combined fleets
had chased him to the haven of Genoa; and again, two years thereafter,
when he had planted the _Captain_ between two enemy vessels and
blasted them both to defeat.

Four times more he felt its sickness seize his vitals--at Cadiz, where
he had first been wounded in a disastrous combined operations assault;
in Aboukir Bay, where the foe had let him sink their warships one by
one, like sheep awaiting helplessly the wolf; in the Kattegatt, and at
Kronstadt, where for once no shot had been fired.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now he felt its grip and his restless fighter's soul demanded some sort
of action to prevent it from controlling him entirely. It was odd that
he should feel it so keenly, for once action was joined, only icy water
flowed in his veins.

He rose then, adapting his motions to the roll of the Atlantic beneath
his ship like the veteran sailor he was. A short, angular, indomitable
figure, he strode across his cabin to the admiral's walk aft. He was an
admiral, was he not? Who had a better right to use it?

The sky was cloudy above the restless black velvet of the sea, and the
shipboard sounds were clearer. Somewhere below one horizon lay the
coast of Spain and the port of Cadiz where he had suffered the anguish
of a shattered elbow. And somewhere below the other horizon lay the
foe, the elusive foe he had pursued so long and so vainly.

It was a chase that had begun in January, just nine months before
to the day. It had crossed the ocean twice, from Toulon to Cadiz,
from Cadiz to Martinique, from Martinique to Cape Finisterre, from
Finisterre back to Cadiz.

And now at last that he was within reach of his quarry, he feared their
strength, for they outnumbered him by twenty-five per cent in capital
ships alone. He wondered how best to overcome this advantage, for if he
let them slip he might never get another chance as good.

He saw then that the ship behind his own was out of line and frowned.
Were blunders by individual commanders, the bane of all fleet admirals,
to begin already? And then he saw that not only the next ship but those
behind it were well to starboard as he stood.

His own ship must be in disorder. He lifted his head before turning
back to go on deck and give the necessary orders, heard the yaw of the
ship beneath him as it swung a few degrees to get back in position. He
smiled, issuing a self-reprimand for taking it upon himself even in
thought, to correct the proper captain of the ship. An admiral, after
all, was merely a guest on the flagship.

Lightning played through the clouds above him and he watched it,
listening for the rumble of thunder that would inevitably follow. It
sounded like the man-made thunder that was sure to roar and rumble on
the morrow. Even the gods....

Suddenly, the whole sky seemed to light up in a blinding, terrifying
glare. He thought it must have struck the ship, as his frail body was
picked up and tossed through the air like a wisp of straw. And then his
senses failed him and he no longer saw anything at all....

When he recovered consciousness he was lying in a corridor so strange
that it might well have been heaven or hell. It was definitely not of
any world he knew.

It was shining white and utterly bare of decoration. Light came from
curious glowing rods set at intervals where wall and ceiling met. The
floor, of some curious composition substance, was hard beneath his
sorely bruised body.

Silently he cursed to himself, aware only with the ingrained habit of
years of stern discipline, that he was not on his ship when he was
needed most. Not until he had managed to stand upright by supporting
himself against the wall did he reflect that he might no longer have a
ship or a fleet to be needed upon.

He was surely the victim of some inexplicable catastrophe. Standing
unaided, he rubbed his aching forehead.

Then, because to stand still was not in his nature, he began to walk
along the corridor. He ignored the round-cornered doors, painted
white like the walls, that appeared at intervals. At the end of the
passage was a companionway and its steps offered escape, or at least
observation.

Slowly he climbed it and then another stairway and nowhere did
man appear to stop his progress or to offer information as to his
whereabouts. Beneath the white paint the wall was hard, unyielding,
metallic to the touch of his left hand. He climbed still another
companionway, came to an open door and entered it.

He was in a medium-sized, square chamber, furnished with strange chairs
and tables of shining metal and leather. Though he needed urgently to
rest himself, he glanced at their proffered comforts only briefly. His
keen blue eyes had spotted a bookcase against the far wall.

       *       *       *       *       *

His light brows drew together as he studied the titles on their backs.
They were in English, but the titles were as unfamiliar to him as
were the bindings upon which they were printed. There were a book on
navigation by a man named Bowditch, a set of volumes on sea power by
an Admiral Mahan, a nest of volumes on something called radar by a man
with an unpronounceable name.

From them, alien as they were, he derived some satisfaction. He was
either on a fantastic sort of a ship or in some place where ship lore
was a topic of discussion. He looked further and his blue eyes bulged.
His own name stared back at him in letters of gold leaf.

Plucking the book out, he leafed it open incredulously, sat down on
the nearest alien metal and leather chair--which proved surprisingly
comfortable as it gave just enough beneath his weight. Using his left
hand dextrously, he turned to the contents page.

It was then that voices at the open doorway caused him to look up
abruptly.

"... no actual damage done beyond what we have already suffered, sir,"
said one of them. "But it was close."

"We should be out of the pattern, Smithers," said another, deeper
voice. "Once we're out of the area we may be able to dock her
ourselves. So at least our mission has been accomplished."

"Then we're definitely doomed, sir?" the first voice inquired. Like
the other, he spoke incisive English, but in accents unlike any the
listener had ever heard.

"The Geiger counters tell the story and it's all bad," came the reply.
"It's all right for you and me--but when I think of the men ... well,
I'm not sorry we gave the devils what we did. They had it coming to
them."

"They did indeed, sir. It's odd about the men. Mass hysteria is the
last thing I'd have figured on, even under the present circumstances."

"Such things are not new to the sea, Smithers. But the men who reported
it didn't seem hysterical."

"But reporting sight of a fleet of square-riggers, sir--square-riggers
under full sail--twenty or thirty of them. It's way beyond me, sir."

"Beyond me too, Smithers. Good night."

Retreating footsteps sounded outside and then the door was shut as a
tall, burly man with a heavily sunburned face stepped into the room and
closed the door behind him.

He moved to a wall shelf behind whose gleaming twin rails stood a
carafe and glasses and poured himself a drink. He wore khaki trousers,
a khaki shirt, open at the neck, with four little stars at the collar,
and a strange headgear, like a skullcap with a long crimson brim.

He poured himself a glass of water, drank it with relish, put the glass
down, turned--and saw his visitor.

"Omigosh!" he exclaimed, passed a hand over his eyes and looked again.
He came halfway across the room, staring as if at a ghost.

"Omigosh!" he breathed again. "Are you real?"

"I begin to wonder," said the little man, rising from his chair. "Who
are you?" The unconscious arrogance of years of command was in his
voice.

"Since this is _my_ cabin, who in hades are you?" Then, after a
silence that endured while the burly man in khaki studied the pale face
of the man before him, the stringy ash-blond hair, the tarnished blue
coat with its white facings and pinned-up right sleeve he muttered.
"Don't tell me. I know."

"I have not the honor," Horatio Nelson replied. "And if you were in
any way responsible for plucking me from the admiral's walk of the
_Victory_ on the eve of battle, I should greatly appreciate an
explanation."

The big man with the stars on his collar came swiftly forward, put a
hand on Nelson's shoulder as if to make sure that he was real, and
stared at him. As an afterthought he pinched himself hard.

"Square rigged ships in the light of the blast--and Horatio Nelson in
my cabin!" he muttered.

"Since you know my name, why do you persist in doubting my reality?"
the one-armed admiral asked with a trace of impatience.

       *       *       *       *       *

Without answering the other went to a wall cupboard, opened it and took
out a bottle. He got the pitcher and glasses from the railed shelf and
put the collection down on the table in the center of the room.

"Say when," he said. "I think we both need this. I'm Admiral Edward
Kirkham of the United States Navy. Your health, Admiral. And don't
bother to drink mine. I haven't any, you see."

"United States Navy," said Nelson, accepting the glass gratefully.
"You have a brilliant man in Stephen Decatur, and your new frigates
trounced the French soundly. But what do you in these waters since the
Tripolitan pirates have been defeated?"

"Admiral," said Kirkham, sitting down and motioning Nelson to take the
seat across from him, "explanations seem to be in order from both of
us. How to begin?"

"At the beginning, perhaps," said Nelson with the ghost of a smile.
However mad the circumstances, he could not but like this bluff flag
officer. American or no, he was one of his own kind.

"That would take years," said Kirkham. "We have a saying at home which
goes, 'The time, the place and the girl.' Its implications should be
understandable to a man like yourself."

"Entirely," said Nelson with a faint smile.

"Well, Admiral, consider yourself the girl for the purpose of metaphor.
We are roughly a hundred miles southwest of Cadiz, so the place and
the girl are right--remember, you're the girl. It's the time that's
cockeyed."

"Cockeyed?" said Nelson. Then, "Oh! And just why is it cockeyed,
Admiral?"

"Because, dammit, you've been deader than a doornail for more than a
hundred and fifty-five years. Look at that book in your hand. It tells
the story, if you're man enough to take it! You died at Trafalgar on
October twenty-first, eighteen hundred and five."

"And this is the night of October twentieth, nineteen-sixty!" mused
Nelson. He shuddered briefly.

"Eh?" said Kirkham. He looked apologetic. "Sorry to give it to you so
brutally, Admiral, but you're on a ship of men who have little longer
to live. We've been washed by so much radioactive water our only hope
is to get her back to port before we become derelict."

"Radioactive water?" said Nelson. Then he dismissed the question as of
no account. He laid the book on the table without opening it and looked
earnestly at his host.

"Tell me, Admiral, did we win?"

"You knocked them to pieces," said Kirkham. "Your twenty-seven ships of
the line hit Villeneuve's thirty-three so hard, you forced eighteen to
strike without the loss of a ship yourself."

"Tell me, Admiral," said Nelson. "What tactics did I employ to gain so
signal a victory?"

"You smashed their line by attacking in double column. They failed
to employ low raking fire and aimed as usual at your rigging. Once
through, you had them."

       *       *       *       *       *

Nelson sighed, but it was not with relief.

"Thank you, Admiral. You say it's all in here?" He tapped the book with
his left hand.

"All there," said Kirkham.

"One thing troubles me, Admiral. How am I to fight this battle if I am
not with my fleet?"

"Good heavens!" Kirkham stared at him open-mouthed. The enormity of
what had happened seemed just to have sunk in upon him. "Then the ships
my watch and radar-men reported must have been yours!"

"Exactly," said Nelson. "And perhaps you would be good enough to tell
me how I was plucked from my own admiral's walk to the decks of this
very strange vessel?"

"I'm no Einstein," said the American. Then he laughed. "I'm no
scientific wizard, Admiral. But that last atom blast that nearly got
us must have kicked the Earth right back on its own time trail for a
second. It certainly made enough of a fuss. And we may get more any
minute."

"What sort of war is this?" Nelson asked, disturbed. "You say you and
your men are dying, you talk of earth-shaking 'atom' blasts, yet you
fight in sealed cabins."

"Not sealed tightly enough," said Kirkham. "By the way, you are aboard
the United States Battleship Kentucky, first capital ship in the world
to mount major guided missiles instead of heavy guns. Perhaps this will
help you."

He moved quickly to the bookcase, pulled out a few volumes and laid
them on the table. They were illustrated histories of sea power, and
in them he traced the development of warships from the sail-driven
four-deckers of 1805 through the first steam frigates, the early
breastwork monitors, the dreadnoughts and the mighty superdreadnoughts
of World War Two, to the semi-submersible ships of the new conflict.

"We have them too," he stated, pointing to the last-named. "But we've
had all these old-style ships like this wagon we're aboard, built and
ready. So they sent us out as a raiding force to plant guided atomic
missiles on the enemy's vitals from close inshore.

"There were only twenty-four of us to begin with--the Kentucky, the
Missouri, the New Jersey, battleships; the Midway, the Franklin D.
Roosevelt and the Coral Sea, carriers; the Alaska, Guam and Hawaii,
large cruisers; three San Diegos, small cruisers; and a dozen of the
big new destroyers.

"Our main attack is coming over the North Pole--airborne, and we were
merely a diversion. We had luck and launched our missiles successfully.
The troop landings are coming off almost without opposition according
to the latest dispatches. But the enemy isn't through by a long shot.
There's a lot of him and he's out to finish us."

"I can understand that," said Nelson, "though I confess much of your
terminology is beyond me. But how can an incredible steel floating
fortress of more than fifty thousand tons be damaged?"

"The answer to that lies in the fact that only this battleship, the
Midway, the Alaska and Guam, one of the light cruisers and seven of
the destroyers are still afloat. And of these, only the crews of one
cruiser and three destroyers have not been doomed by radioactivity."

"What is this radioactivity you speak of, Admiral?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Kirkham told him, crisply, graphically. At its conclusion his
listener's face was even paler than its wont. He rose and saluted the
American gravely.

"You and your crew deserve the salute of every sailor who ever
lived"--he stumbled a little over the phrase, caught himself and went
on--"and I am proud to salute you in their behalf. War has become a
terrible thing."

"It always was," said Kirkham. He had reached for the glass to pour
another pair of drinks when a buzzer sounded and he flipped the switch
on a box at his elbow.

"Enemy plane sighted and destroyed fifty miles off port bow," came the
report. Kirkham swore and closed the switch. He rose, looked at his
strange visitor.

"Care to come up and see the fireworks?" he asked. "We've just been
spotted by another plane."

Nelson rose quickly. His host started toward the door, then checked
himself and came back.

"Better cover that costume of yours, Admiral," he said. "Since they saw
your ships, the boys are a bit jumpy and they're in no mood for what
they might think were gags. Here--put this raincoat on. It will cover
you."

With the book clutched under his left elbow, Nelson followed Admiral
Kirkham up through a bewildering series of corridors and companionways
to an armored gallery high on the conning tower of the battleship. He
stayed close to his host as suggested by the latter.

The Englishman's eyes widened at the spectacle that greeted him. From
where he stood he had a view of the entire immense foredeck with its
huge rocket launchers and tier upon tier of lesser weapons. Like a
great steel monster it cut through the dark waters at incredible speed.

"Take these," said Kirkham, thrusting a pair of binoculars with complex
attachments into his hand. "They're infra-red. You'll see the Midway
off to starboard. Her night fighters are taking off now."

Without asking for explanations, Nelson stuck the book under his right
armpit and handled the heavy binoculars awkwardly with his one good
hand. Once he had them focussed he forgot their awkwardness and weight.

Through their lenses, which displayed the night as if it were daylight,
and brought the horizon close, he saw the amazing sight no man of his
era could ever have witnessed.

A mighty flat-decked vessel with a huge superstructure stood into the
wind as Admiral Kirkham had predicted. From her deck, a small machine
rose, dipped below the level of her towering square bow and then rose
through the air with incredible speed. Another, another and another
appeared, to vanish in the clouded heavens above.

"A lot of good they'll do," someone muttered close beside him. "The
yellowbellies won't send over bombers and trying to stop their guided
missiles with planes is like trying to stop a leak with tissue paper."

Nelson smiled faintly to himself. Though they were talking of weapons
he had yet to understand, he understood the simile. He was glad he
had not compared "iron men in wooden ships" to "wooden men in ships
of steel," a paraphrase that had been on the tip of his tongue. These
seamen were worthy of any navy in history--girding themselves to fight
on, although their doom had been already sealed by some devilish
mechanism devised by man to come.

He became aware that Kirkham was issuing rapid orders, that men were
moving quietly about jobs they well knew from long practise. And though
this monster under his feet was not a ship at all as he knew it, he yet
rejoiced in the sense of discipline, of command, of power. Somehow he
felt at home, almost as if he were on his own _Victory_.

So huge was the ship that at first he was not aware it had changed
course. But the mighty flat-topped vessel to port was swinging about,
as were the two lesser vessels within the range of the binoculars. The
entire squadron was doubling back upon its course. Oh, to have ships
so maneuverable without recourse to whim of wind and weather as these
beneath him!

"They'll not be apt to drop a pattern where they've already sought us,"
Kirkham said in his ear. "So we'll move northeast before we swing back
toward the west."

"Where is the British fleet?" Nelson asked.

"North of Scotland with our main body," said the American. "They're
supporting the main troop landings to follow the airborne in. Those
devils will wish they'd never driven us to fight them before we're
through."

"I am glad we are allies," said Nelson.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was then that a frightening voice came through a sort of horn
overhead, announcing that missiles had been detected on their way.
Kirkham barked terse orders. Suddenly the ship all around them blazed
with fire.

Hundreds of rocket projectiles shot upward into the darkness, picking
up speed as they rose. Seconds passed and then, far, far up in the
heavens a huge flare of bright white light blazed and subsided.

[Illustration: Far up in the heavens a huge flare of bright white light
blazed and subsided.]

"Got that one," said Kirkham tersely. "But there'll be more, never
fear."

Again rockets rose from the _Kentucky_ and from the other ships
of the squadron. Again, seconds later, they hit their target and again
the skies were horribly bright. That man could cause such colossal
explosions was terrifying and splendid at once. Nelson forgot about his
own task, his own imminent death, his own victory, in the tautness of
the strange battle being fought around him.

And then, once more, the world shook and an unbelievable brightness
blazed and the Briton found himself flying through the air before his
senses were blotted out.

       *       *       *       *       *

He was lying once more on the admiral's walk of his flagship and the
familiar creak of rope and mast and the slap of waves against wooden
hull were the first sounds that registered through the numbness of his
senses.

A considerable portion of the railing of the walk had been torn
jaggedly loose and a corner of it slanted ominously downward, but it
was still supporting him. He got to his feet unsteadily, passed a hand
over his forehead and leaned against the woodwork for support.

Something pressed against his ribs on the right side and he looked down
to see that the book from Admiral Kirkham's shelf was still lodged
between the stump of his right arm and his ribs. He shook his head to
clear it, but the book was still there. Staggering a little, he went
on into his cabin, closed the door after him. Someone was knocking at
the door, calling his name.

"Come in," he said wearily.

The lieutenant in charge of the watch entered and saluted fearfully.
"We seem to have struck some sort of floating object twice within the
last hour," he said.

"Is she filling?" Nelson asked sharply.

"No, sir," the younger officer replied.

"Then resume your watch. And keep this ship in line hereafter."

"Yes, sir," said the officer. He saluted and went out.

Nelson stared after him, then reached for the bottle of rum, poured
himself a stout tot and opened the strange volume before him. Battle
eve or no, he needed the reinforcement of alcohol just then. The
very sight and reality of the book made it necessary. He opened it
to the chapter near the end--frighteningly near the end--entitled
_Trafalgar_.

He was still studying it when, hours later, a subordinate came in to
inform him that the French and Spanish fleets had been sighted and
seemed disposed to have it out.

"Very well," said Nelson. He rose, picked up his spyglass and started
toward the door. Then, with a muttered excuse, he turned back into the
room, picked up the volume, and tossed it over, into the South Atlantic.

       *       *       *       *       *

The skies were blue and the thirty-three ships of the line of the enemy
lay in perfect array ahead of him. Nelson studied them briefly through
his spyglass.

He had a curious feeling of having been through this before--like a lad
in school who has taken his Latin translation into class with him to
cover his lack of talent for sight reading in the ancient tongue.

He gave crisp commands and, ignoring the expressions of surprise
on those who obeyed them, watched the signal flags flutter to the
mastheads, waited for the answering pennants to fly from Collingwood's
flagship and the others.

Yes, he was outfoxing his own tactics with a vengeance, employing the
bulldozing, line-smashing, headlong technique that the drunken Rodney
had used to defeat de Grasse in the Battle of the Saints.

"Have no fear," he said to a trembling lieutenant at his elbow as they
moved closer to the enemy. "We'll have broken him before he tries
raking fire below our foremasts. He has no stomach for this style of
war."

He stood, almost carelessly, on the quarterdeck as his fleet moved
relentlessly in, ignoring the enemy's rigging fire and holding their
own until they were in his midst. There would be time enough for
gunnery in the ship-to-ship combats sure to follow.

Once or twice, although he knew it was folly, his eyes turned upward
toward the sky--as if seeking a sign of some explosion beyond man's
comprehension, or some strange, noisy object that carried men like
birds. But no such sign was vouchsafed him.

When, as the huge French ship _Redoubtable_ loomed up through
the cotton-white smoke of her own broadsides, a mizzentop sniper's
bullet struck him in the chest, he stood almost as one braced for the
blow--as, in his heart of hearts, he was.

They carried him below and the battle roared on around him, a
comforting lullaby for a man of war and the sea. He felt little pain,
relapsed into a semi-coma that was not sleep but was wonderfully
restful for all that.

Then, later, he emerged from the cloud to hear the surgeon muttering to
a tearful junior officer who stood by him.

"... can't understand it," the surgeon said. "The wound itself is not
serious. The bullet was deflected from the sternum and pierced no vital
organ. But I can't stop the bleeding. It's as if the blood vessels
themselves had broken down.

"Faith, I'd say the bullet was poisoned if I could name a poison that
produced such curious results. The very cells inside the body seem to
have collapsed."

Nelson heard him and turned away. The surgeon had never heard of
radioactivity. He knew he was going, but he had an idea he'd have
company wherever he went--company a man like himself could talk with,
and drink with, and pass the time of day with.

He cared no longer about this battle which was already won--and then
he thought of that sterner fight in which English sailors would be
standing beside sailors from the new United States of America, sailors
who had already proven their mettle. That was when they'd have to step
to keep up--but England would expect every man to do his duty.

He sensed that his lips were moving and wondered if he had spoken
aloud--and then, for the third time in less than twenty-four hours,
darkness descended upon him. And this time it was absolute.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADMIRAL'S WALK ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of The long way back, by John Barrett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The long way back

Author: John Barrett

Release Date: December 17, 2022 [eBook #69564]

Language: English

Produced by: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LONG WAY BACK ***





                           The Long Way Back

                            By JOHN BARRETT

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                Thrilling Wonder Stories February 1948.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


Brainard died on the third day after they set out from the wreck. Carl
Reese and the girl, Thela Brill, scraped a grave in the sand with flat
pieces of rock, and laid him in it on the litter they had used to carry
him. They covered it with rocks to keep the sand wolves out, and set
off again across the desert.

That day they did not go far. The sun came down through the cloudless
Martian sky like a hammer. Every hour or so they had to creep into the
shadow of the rocks and rest. It was about mid-afternoon when the girl
collapsed. Carl carried her to one of the shallow caves in the cliffs
that were growing more numerous, and gave her the water flask to sip.

Her blond hair was grayed with powdery sand, and Carl saw there were
hollows now under her reddened eyes, but even with the strain of
fatigue, her clean-featured face was beautiful. He watched her slender
throat as she sipped the water.

He thought, She can't stand much more of this. She's not built for it.

The flask was still heavy when she handed it back.

"You'll need more than that to keep you going till sundown," he said.

She shook her head. "You better go on alone. It's getting so I can't
see very well."

Carl Reese looked out at the crumbling rock and sand. It was not the
heat that got you. The middle of this desert was no warmer than a cool
day back on Earth. But the sun, pounding down through the thin air
dehydrated you and did funny things to your brain. And if you stood up
under that, the glittering sand drove you blind.

"We might as well stay here for the night," he said. "It's as good a
place as any."

"How much water is there left?" she asked.

"There's a quart in the other flask," he said. He knew there was hardly
a pint, but if he had said so, she wouldn't take any more.

She leaned back against the rock, and squinted at the shimmering
wasteland. "Do you think Brainard really saw a ship?" she asked.

"Of course he did. Brainard wouldn't lie about a thing like that."

"How could he see a ship on the ground when we were falling at six
hundred miles an hour?"

"He could see the sun flash on the metal," Carl said.

       *       *       *       *       *

She pushed the grayed curls back from her cheek. "But if there was a
ship we should have found it by now."

"Not necessarily," Carl said. "We haven't been traveling very fast."

The girl looked at her hand that was covered with gray dust from her
hair. "I'm a mess," she said.

"You ought to try and sleep a little," Carl said. "You were taking care
of Brainard all last night."

"No, I'm not sleepy."

Carl sat there watching her. In a few minutes he saw her eyes close and
her head droop forward on her knees. She did not wake up when he laid
her down at the back of the cave and shoved his jacket under her head.

When the sun sank and the chill began to make him shiver, Carl went
outside to look for fuel. As usual there were no plants, not even a
blade of dried grass, but in the face of a nearby cliff he found
again a ledge of coal. At least, he thought, the desert furnishes us
one thing, and it keeps us from turning to ice in the night.

He carried back an armful, and followed the procedure of the night
before, breaking the lumps into little pieces, and grinding a few of
them into a black powder that would burst into flame with a second shot
from the heat gun.

When the fire was going, he gathered enough coal to last through the
night, and sat down to doze away the hours.

Nights were the worst. In the day-time there was always the next patch
of shade to be reached, or you had the compass to check. Even the job
of putting one foot ahead of the other was something to concentrate
on. At nights, with only the flames of the fire, and the moan of the
wind in the rocks, your mind wandered, and once more you were streaking
through space in an Interplanetary Patrol ship with home port on Earth
only twenty hours away.

You were in the pilot's seat pointing out interesting landmarks on the
planet Mars to the pretty, blond girl from cabin three who was standing
beside you. And you were wishing that her smile and good humor meant
something personal, knowing all the time that it was only because she
and you and the five men in the main cabin had uncovered information
that was going to stop a threatened invasion of Earth by the little men
of Jupiter. And then the dream suddenly turned horrible as the ship was
caught in an invisible net that jammed the controls under your hands,
and hurled you down upon the face of the Red Planet.

Carl woke up sweating, his fists clenched, his arms aching from the
fight with a phantom rudder lever.

The flames had dwindled to red coals. He saw the girl was shivering in
her sleep. He built up the fire and lifted her closer. She opened her
eyes.

"I was dreaming I was still working in the consular office," she said
vaguely. "And the director told me to put a note on the bulletin board
informing the employees that we were about to enter the one hundred and
forty-third Ice Age."

"The sun will be up in an hour," he said.

They sat watching the rocks and the cliffs take shape in the half light
of dawn.

"Sometimes I wish you weren't such a good pilot," she said wearily.

"What do you mean?"

"I mean the way you pulled the ship out of that dive so that only four
people were killed, instead of seven."

Carl stared into the fire. If we don't find something today, he
thought, she'll crack up.

He handed the water flask to her. She shook her head.

"Take some," he said sternly. "You've only had a couple of swallows
since yesterday noon."

"How much have you had?" she asked.

"I've had my share," he said. "I feel pretty good."

"You're a liar," she said evenly. "You haven't had any."

       *       *       *       *       *

Carl swore to himself. What could you do? You couldn't hit her over the
head, and force it down her throat when she was unconscious.

Outside the rocks changed from deep rose to light pink and then to
glaring yellow. Already the sand was beginning to sparkle.

"If we do find that ship, what good will it do?" she asked. "It'll be a
wreck like ours was--only worse."

"Brainard said he thought it wasn't wrecked."

She covered her eyes from the glare of the sand. "To me that doesn't
make sense," she said. "Those fiends from Jupiter aren't stupid. They'd
know that if they let anyone get through their electronic beam net from
either side, the cat would be out of the bag."

"But the last news report we received before we hit the net had an
item in it announcing Dekmar had just landed on Mars with his new,
experimental ship."

"Dekmar has a reputation as a crackpot. Maybe he was transmitting from
space somewhere near earth. With him it might have been some sort of a
publicity stunt."

"I think you've got the wrong idea about Dekmar," Carl said. "He's a
crackpot in some ways. Lots of bright people are, but he's sincere. If
he said he was broadcasting from the Lusarian Desert on Mars, that's
where he was."

"Then why didn't he say something about the net?"

"They said his broadcast was cut off right after it started."

"If he was smart enough to get a ship through the net, why couldn't he
get a visaphone signal through it?"

Carl felt the anger swell up in his throat. He stood up. "All right
then. Have it your way. It was all a hoax, and Brainard didn't see a
ship, and maybe we're going to fry out here in this desert. What of it?
Is it a crime to be an optimist? Just because--" He stopped. She was
sobbing.

"I'm sorry," he said gently. He thought, It's beginning to get me, too.

She stood up slowly and brushed the sand from her clothes. "No, you're
right," she said. "I don't know why I talk like that. I guess I just
want you to argue against me. When you tell me I'm wrong, it makes me
feel better."

Carl rubbed his prickly chin. She was sure a hard one to figure out.
"We better get moving," he said, "before it gets too bright." He
started to give her the water flask, and then saw she was going to balk
again. He took two swallows himself and handed it to her. She took two
swallows, also.

They made good time for the first two hours. After that the sun was
torture. By midmorning they were forced into the shade again. Carl felt
his leg muscles begin to quiver as he eased himself back against the
rocks. He looked at the girl and saw that her face was white.

"You lie down for a while," he said. "I'm going to climb this rock pile
and look around." He got up.

"I'll go with you," she said. "Just let me rest a few minutes."

"You're too tired," Carl said.

"I'll be all right in a few minutes."

They rested for a half hour, and then the girl followed him up through
the jagged boulders. He kept looking back, waiting for her to say
she had had enough. She followed him silently. Her finger tips were
bleeding, and there was a long red scrape on her calf. It took twenty
minutes to reach the flat top.

Carl stood up shakily and looked around. The desert stretched for
miles, a waste of rock and sand, shimmering under the wavering air. He
looked west and saw that their way would soon be blocked by deep, sheer
canyons.

       *       *       *       *       *

He faced the southwest, and something bright made him blink. He opened
his eyes wide. On a low mesa-like outcropping near the edge of one of
the canyons lay a rocket ship. The metal was smooth and unscarred. It
rested there as if it had been landed gently.

"I can see it," he told the girl. "It's about three miles away." He
leaned down and helped her up beside him.

"Fire your gun at a rock," the girl said. "If there's anyone aboard,
he'll hear the explosion."

Carl took out his heat pistol and aimed at a large flat rock near the
base of the pile. A long blue flame speared out. Carl kept his finger
on the trigger, and the rock suddenly exploded with an ear-shattering
crack. They looked toward the ship. There was no sign of a response.

The walk across the last stretch of sand seemed endless. There was no
chance to stop or rest. The sun drove them on. Carl thought, If there's
no water aboard her we're finished. Fifty feet from the big hull he
stopped.

"Dekmar!" he called out.

The metal rang to his voice. In the canyon beyond he heard a tiny rock
slide rattle into nothingness.

"Maybe it's not Dekmar's ship," the girl said. "Maybe it's been here
for years."

"It's Dekmar's ship, all right," Carl said. "I can tell by those ridges
running down the side of the hull. I happened to be at the factory one
day last spring when he was having them put on."

They walked around behind the tail pipes and found the hatch in the
other side. It was partly open. Carl started toward it, but the girl
grabbed his arm.

"What's that?" She was pointing to a wide trailing furrow in the sand
by the hatch.

Carl felt a prickling sensation along his spine. "I don't know," he
said. "It looks like the track of some animal." He swung open the door.
"Whatever it is we've got to get in out of this sun." He stepped over
the high threshold.

The inside of the ship, protected by the heavy insulation in the hull,
was cold. Carl blinked into the darkness and yelled out, "Dekmar!"

There was no answer. He began rolling back some of the shutters
covering the ports.

The girl came up beside him. "There's a light in one of the forward
cabins."

Carl looked down the alleyway and saw a small light burning over a
desk. They walked cautiously toward it, and came out into the control
room near the nose of the ship. The light threw long shadows over a big
panel of levers and dials. In one corner of the panel three meters were
glowing red.

"His visaphone set is still on," Carl said. "He must have been
interrupted while he was broadcasting." He stepped toward the panel and
almost fell over a chair lying on the floor. He picked it up and saw
the back of it was splintered. He glanced quickly around the cabin. On
a table by the control panel was a small metal box. The lever on the
side of it was almost twisted off. Then he saw the door hanging crazily
by one hinge.

"It looks like there's been a fight," he said. He found a switch and
turned on the lights and heat all over the ship. Walking back along the
alleyway, he saw that the bulkheads had long scratches in them, and two
flush lights overhead had been smashed.

He reached the hatch and stepped down to follow the trail in the sand.
It led to the cliff edge. He was bending down, trying to make sense out
of the furrow when he heard the girl scream.

       *       *       *       *       *

Looking up, he saw her standing in the hatchway. She was staring wildly
behind him. He did not wait to look around. He ran to the ship, jumped
inside and yanked the door to. At the same instant something hissed
through the air and whammed down across the hull. Carl bolted the hatch.

"What is it?"

"A snake." The girl's voice was faint.

Carl looked out the port and his stomach seemed to turn over. The snake
had a body as thick as a big tree, and a wide, plow-shaped head. It
thrashed at the hull. Carl winced as its teeth scraped across the metal
surface.

"Well, we know what happened to Dekmar," he said. "He must have left
the hatch open while he was using the visaphone and the thing got him."

The girl was swaying on her feet. Carl caught her as her knees buckled.
He found a cabin with a couch and then hunted for the ship's stores.
There was water, gallons of it, and he found some biscuits. For the
next half hour they sat in the cabin sipping water and gnawing at the
biscuits. The girl kept looking out of the port.

"How could anything as big as that live out here?" she asked. "There's
so little food, so little water."

"I've heard reports of these snakes in the Lusarian desert," Carl said.
"The biologists say they're a hangover from an old type of animal.
They don't have a carbon system metabolism. Their chemical system is
based on silicon, and they can grind up pebbles and small boulders and
get nourishment out of them. They have teeth like rock crushers."

"Rock crushers." The girl shuddered.

Carl stood up. "Get your mind off it," he said. "See if you can find us
something a little more substantial to eat. I'm going to look over the
ship and see if I can figure out how to operate it."

He was still checking instruments when the girl came to the door of the
control room twenty minutes later.

"Well?"

"I think I can run it," Carl said. "Everything seems to be standard
except for one thing." He pointed to the square box on the table by the
panel. "There's a mess of tubes and coils in there that don't make any
sense. They must be important. They're connected by wires to the cables
that run down the ridges in the hull."

"If it doesn't have anything to do with the controls, why can't you
just forget about it," the girl said.

Carl frowned at the box. Above the twisted lever was the word
_Reduction_. There was an arrow showing which direction the lever
should be moved.

"I found something to eat," the girl said.

They walked back to the cabin that had evidently been made for a small
dining room. The girl sat down opposite him and Carl suddenly stiffened
in his chair. She was transformed. Her hair was soft and shiny again.
The gray dust was gone from her skin. She had found some silky green
cloth and made an impromptu skirt and a cross hatch halter above. He
looked down at his torn clothes, felt the gritty powder on his arms and
legs.

She laughed. "It's at the end of the hall," she said.

The shower was warm and there was soap that smelled like spices. As
Carl rubbed himself dry on the big yellow towel, he looked around at
the soft green and black tiles and thought, If this is the life of a
crackpot, I'm all for it.

The meal and the sight of the girl opposite did something to him. When
he walked back to the control cabin he was whistling. The girl came and
stood in the doorway.

"Are you going to try and get through the net?" she asked in a nervous
voice.

"Now don't get worried," he said. "If Dekmar got through, the ship must
have some protection around the hull."

       *       *       *       *       *

He started up the rockets and boosted the ship gently off the sand.
After two wide circles over the desert to get the feel of the controls,
he pointed her up and turned on the power. The girl moved over into
the acceleration seat. Out of the corner of his eye Carl saw her strap
herself in. She gripped the arms tightly. Her face was pale.

The net was a thousand miles up. When the altimeter showed eight
hundred miles, Carl slowed down and felt his way along. At nine hundred
the controls began to drag. He shut off the power and the ship dropped
back. The controls were freed.

He tried it again, nosing up slowly. This time the levers almost jammed
before he could shut off the power. The ship fell, whirling and looping
crazily. It dropped five hundred miles before he could pull it out.
Carl was sweating when he brought it down gently on the desert.

"Let's not try that again," the girl said.

Carl stared out at the sky. "I see how they're doing it," he said.
"They have a power plant sustained on an antigravity ray somewhere
above the Rapathian Mountains, and it shoots out a beam shaped like an
umbrella clear across the solar system." He swung around to the control
panel. "Still, Dekmar got through." He reached across and fingered the
dial of the little box on the table.

"Do you think we ought to fool with that?" the girl asked.

"We can't stay out on this desert forever, can we? Besides, if we
don't get that information back to the home government offices pretty
soon, it'll be too late." He found a switch at the back of the box and
pressed it. A strange throbbing ran through the ship. Carl moved the
twisted lever gingerly in the direction of the arrow. Sparks shot out
of the loose contact points and the throbbing speeded up.

The girl cried out. "Look! The rocks are changing."

Carl spun around in the chair. For a second he thought his eyes had
gone bad. The rocks outside the port were swelling up out of the desert
like balloons. He realized what it was.

"Reduction! Of course! It's not the rocks. It's us. We're getting
smaller."

Outside the port little pebbles were expanding into gigantic,
rough-hewn boulders.

"But I don't feel any different," the girl said.

"Of course not." Carl had to raise his voice above the throb of the
Reducer. "Everything inside the ship gets smaller proportionately. The
ridges on the outside of the hull must create a field." He turned back
to the panel. "And I've got a hunch this is going to get us through the
net."

He leaned over to the table and moved the lever down another notch. The
girl came over beside him.

"Look," Carl said. "The net acts on big things. If we were reduced to
the size of bacteria, there wouldn't be enough power concentrated in
one spot to affect the controls. We could slip through."

The rocket rolled suddenly as the flat sand surface under it became an
uneven plain of craggy rock. Carl turned on the keel jets and lifted
the ship clear. He looked out at the faces of sand grains that had
expanded to glassy mirror-like sheets. The ship's about two inches
long, he thought. His stomach felt as if it had a lead ball in it. He
tried the controls. The ship responded perfectly.

"But we can't keep getting smaller," the girl said. "You just can't
keep concentrating a thing."

"Now take it easy," Carl said. "Evidently there's some sort of a mass
dissipater connected with this. I don't know how it works, but Dekmar
must have known what he was doing."

       *       *       *       *       *

With a jerk, he started the tail jets and the ship roared forward and
upward. The air was no longer clear. It was filled with hundreds of
little particles that bumped gently against the hull. The girl started
back when one touched the port.

"Dust particles," Carl said. "At our size they look big."

He turned on full power. The ship spurted upward through a gray storm.
The dust, Carl saw, was not impeding their progress. The particles
touched the hull and bounced away. He set a course for Earth and turned
on the interplanetary drive. At this size they would need speed to get
anywhere.

With his hands still on the controls he turned to the girl. "Move it
back to zero," he said, jerking his head toward the box on the table,
"but don't shut off the switch. I don't want to take any chances of the
ship going back to its original size."

The girl shoved back the lever slowly. The throbbing noise sank to a
low surging sound.

"The lever's loose," she said.

"Just be careful with it."

She came back to the port. "The air's clear now."

"I think that means we're in the beam," Carl said. "Ionized air would
dispel the particles." He felt the ship buck slightly. Through the port
he could see flashes of blue light crackling along the hull. He jiggled
the controls. They were a little tight, but they weren't jammed.
Suddenly he felt them come free. At the same moment something bumped
the hull.

"It's a dust particle," the girl said. She pressed her face against the
port, staring forward. "It's as big as a house."

Carl laughed. "We're through." He checked the course to make sure it
was set for Earth, locked the controls, and stepped over to push off
the Reducer switch.

Afterwards he thought that his elbow must have hit the lever as he
reached for the switch. It happened too fast to be sure. He was aware
only of the blinding blue flash and the jerking contraction of his
muscles.

When he came to the girl was kneeling over him, wiping his face with
something wet and cold. His ears were aching with the throbbing scream
coming from the reducer. The lever to it was lying on the floor.

"How long have I been out?" He had to yell to make himself heard.

"About fifteen minutes."

He started to get up and pain like a knife stab shot through his skull.
He eased back and felt his head.

"You hit a ledge on the bulkhead," she shouted. "I bandaged it. I tried
artificial respiration, ammonia, everything. I thought you'd never come
to."

He shook his head and stared at the table. Suddenly he began to laugh.
"Automatic control," he yelled, pointing to the letters that were
flashing on and off. "It says automatic control. What a joke. There
isn't any control."

He saw the girl watching him, saw the fear in her eyes, the tight line
of her lips. It sobered him instantly. He struggled to his feet. "Let's
get out of this racket," he yelled.

They crossed the alleyway to a little cabin, and Carl closed the
airtight door. The reducer was still screaming, but it sounded far
away. Carl leaned against the door, listening. It was like a siren out
of control, climbing, climbing.

"I've got to stop that thing somehow," he said.

"You can't get near it," the girl said. "I tried once myself when you
were lying on the floor. I touched the table and the shock almost
jerked my arm off."

"But can't you see? I've got to stop it. If I don't we'll shrink. We'll
shrink to the size of a molecule, an atom, an electron, and then--Well,
there isn't anything smaller. We'll disintegrate into a quantum of
energy, or something."

"Wait!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Carl took his hand off the door latch and turned around.

"All right, then," she said quietly. "Let it happen that way. I'd
rather have it like that than seeing you on the floor again, blue and
not breathing."

Carl looked at her eyes that were calm now and steady. He thought, And
I was scared to death she was going to crack up.

He said, "I'm going to try and cut the wires to the thing, anyway. If
we can shut off the current supply, it'll stop." He stepped out into
the screeching din of the alleyway.

They found a small torch in the ship's stores and Carl tried cutting
the metal bulkhead on the outside of the control cabin where he
calculated the current supply would run. The metal was hard and the
torch cut slowly. After ten minutes he pushed up his mask and took a
breather. The bulkhead was hardly marked. Carl tapped it.

"Must be another of Dekmar's inventions," he yelled at the girl. He put
down the mask and tried again. Finally he gave up and shut the torch
off.

He walked to the doorway of the control room. He took out his heat
gun and aimed it at the box. The blue spear of flame did not reach
it. It stopped short about a foot away, and splattered as if it were
ricocheting against something hard. Carl tried it from another angle,
another. The gun began to heat up under his hand, but an invisible
shell of energy blocked off its beam from the box.

He walked back into the cabin across the alleyway. The girl came in
behind him and fastened the door. Carl laid the hot gun on the table.

"Well, I guess that's that," he said. He sat down on a bench by the
port and contemplated the deck.

The girl came over and sat beside him. For a long time she gazed out
through the glass, saying nothing, and then in a weak voice she asked:

"Do you suppose those are molecules?"

Carl looked up. Outside was a tremendously enlarged section of a dust
particle. It was almost transparent, and made up of little dots that
jerked to and fro.

"I suppose so," he said, trying to keep his voice steady. Molecules, he
thought. Molecules, then atoms, then electrons and then--

He closed his eyes and tried to banish the dancing dots from his mind.
He could feel his heart thumping heavily in his chest. When he opened
his eyes again, the dots had expanded. Each dot, he saw, was made of
colored spheres arranged in a pattern--four blue, one red and two
orange. The patterns twisted slowly, passing through one another like
squads of soldiers in a complicated drill, yet all the time holding
their arrangement. Far out from the port he saw another group of three
green and two yellow spheres.

The scream of the Reducer went up another notch. The lights in the ship
dimmed and went out.

"It's drawing off all the current," Carl said. Splashes of red and blue
light were playing over the girl's body. She moved closer to him, wide
eyes fixed on the port. Carl felt her fingers searching for his hand.

A red sphere floated up to the port. It bulged and faded to a blurred
pink, and the pink was darting lights that spread out, enclosing the
ship.

This is an atom, Carl thought. We're inside an atom. The tightness
around his chest grew into a constricting pain.

Then far out in the distance, the core of the red sphere swung into
view--a mass of glittering diamonds. It drifted toward them, holding
its shape till Carl was certain it was going to crash the ship. Then it
separated, and one diamond hung before the port.

[Illustration: There beside Thela, Carl waited for the ripping
explosion which would send them into nothingness.]

Carl, gripping the girl's hand, waited for a ripping explosion that
would send them into nothingness. The explosion did not come. The
trembling light floated toward them, and slowly dissolved into silvery
powder that spread itself across a backdrop of blackness.

       *       *       *       *       *

Staggering up to the port, Carl dragged the girl with him. Distant
points of light hurtled past them. The ship was plunging into an abyss.
No, it was plunging toward one of the tiny white points of light that
was expanding, brightening into a ball, a sphere, a gigantic solid
sphere with a scarred surface, with--

Carl was aware that his ears were ringing. The Reducer had shut off,
its scream replaced by the deep, familiar roar of tail jets. The girl
was shaking his arm and pointing.

"Don't you recognize it?" she asked. "Don't you recognize it?"

And of course he did recognize it, even though every ounce of logic in
his makeup rebelled when he finally said:

"Yes, it's the Earth. The land mass right in front of us is
North America." He went into the control cabin and shut off the
interplanetary drive.

It was quite a few minutes later, when they were skimming over the
peaks of the Rockies with everything ready for a landing, before the
pieces began to fit together in his mind.

"You know," he said slowly, "I guess it does make sense. We say space
is curved. We say a beam of light, if it went far enough would end up
at its starting point. In fact, some astronomers say that nebulae in
one part of the sky might be the same nebulae we see in another part
of the sky, and we're actually seeing them twice because the light
has traveled clear round the universe. Well, then, if the universe
is curved and self-contained in one way, it must be curved and
self-contained in every way. It's like the old symbol of the serpent
swallowing its own tail."

Carl looked over his shoulder. "Are you listening?"

She was frowning at the shiny plates in the after bulkhead. "Yes, I'm
listening."

Carl turned back. He studied the topography unreeling itself on the
visiplate, and eased back the accelerator lever a trifle.

"The way I see it, if light comes back to its starting point, there
is no infinitely distant place. In the same way there would be no
infinitely small size. There's no end or beginning to anything, and if
you travel far enough in any one direction, you always come back to
where you started from. Do you follow me?"

"Well--" She kept staring at the after bulkhead.

"Did you ever study Kant?"

"Kant?"

"Yes, he's a very ancient German philosopher--lived way back when they
didn't have a world government or anything. It was all in a required
philosophy course I took at the University."

"I always steered clear of philosophy," she said. She did not take her
eyes off the after plates.

"Well this fellow Kant claimed that time and space were just creations
of our own minds, and he tried to prove it by extending the logical
implications of them into the structure of the universe till they
contradicted themselves and became meaningless. Let's see, how did he
put it?"

Carl leaned back in the pilot's chair and scratched his head. "First
of all he said the universe must be finite, because it's made up of
the sum of its parts, and as its parts are units, you could never add
up finite units and get infinity. Then he took the other side of the
argument and pointed out that if it was finite, it must have limits,
and if it has limits, it has limits in relation to something beyond it.
And the universe is everything that is, so there couldn't be anything
beyond, except more universe, and if it keeps on going like that, it
isn't finite. But it's not infinite either, so what is it?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The girl started to say something, but Carl held up his hand. "Wait a
minute. I'm not through."

"Kant's conclusion was that space and time were handy, man-made
illusions. But maybe it's the idea of infinity that's the man-made
illusion. It's the idea of infinity and beginnings and endings that
cross you up when you try to reason out how small things can become, or
how large the universe can be.

"We admit the universe is curved and self-contained in one way when
we say light returns to its starting point. It must be curved and
self-contained every other way too. And just as there's no infinite
distance, so there's no infinite size, large or small. Whichever way
you look at it, it's part of a circle, and if you travel far enough in
any one direction, you always come back to the place you started from.
Maybe exploding atoms and expanding galaxies are the same things from
different points of view." He took a breath. "Now what were you going
to say?"

"Are we going to land at Francisco City?"

It took him a few seconds to get his mind down to the question. "Those
were the orders that came through fifteen minutes ago. What's worrying
you?"

"There'll be visigraph reporters and cameramen, won't there?"

Carl twisted around in his seat to see what it was she kept looking
at. It dawned suddenly. The shiny after bulkhead plate made a perfect
mirror. All that time then, he had been talking to himself. She
probably hadn't even been trying to listen.

"Don't tell me you're nervous."

"No, but--" She spread out the fold of her silky skirt. "Do you think
it looks funny? It's really just a piece of an old parachute."

Carl hung on to the controls till the dizziness cleared from his head.
She dragged herself across a Martian desert, she fell through a hole in
the Universe, and you were scared to death all the time for fear she'd
go to pieces, and she comes out of it worrying about the cut of her
dress.

"You look fine," Carl said. "You look wonderful." And as he circled the
field and brought the ship down on the runway, it dawned on him that
she really did look wonderful, and in two minutes she would be stepping
out of this ship, and maybe out of his life for keeps.

He got up from the pilot's chair, and caught her before she reached the
hatch.

"Thela," he said. "There's a crowd of people out there. I'll be taken
to the director's office right away to answer questions about this
ship, and the government officials will be quizzing you all night about
everything we found out and--"

"Yes?" She moved away from him, eyes narrowing.

"After it's over let's get together."

"To discuss some technical aspects of space curvature perhaps?"

"You--" He started to pull her to him, but she twisted away. She was
looking at the ports, jammed now with peering faces.

"I'm listed in the consular directory like all the other employees,"
she said. She smiled and opened the hatch.

Two government officials helped her down into the crowd. He watched her
walk away, and kept thinking about the smile. It was like the Reducer.
You thought things were over with and then you suddenly realized they
were just beginning.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LONG WAY BACK ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of Everyday birds, by Bradford Torrey

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Everyday birds
       Elementary studies

Author: Bradford Torrey

Illustrator: John James Audubon

Release Date: December 17, 2022 [eBook #69563]

Language: English

Produced by: Emmanuel Ackerman, David E. Brown, and the Online
             Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
             file was produced from images generously made available by
             The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EVERYDAY BIRDS ***





Books by Mr. Torrey.


  FRIENDS ON THE SHELF. 12mo, $1.25, _net_. Postage extra.

  NATURE’S INVITATION. 16mo, $1.10, _net_. Postpaid, $1.21.

  THE CLERK OF THE WOODS. 16mo, $1.10, _net_. Postpaid, $1.20.

  FOOTING IT IN FRANCONIA. 16mo, $1.10, _net_. Postpaid, $1.19.

  EVERYDAY BIRDS. Elementary Studies. With twelve colored Illustrations
    reproduced from Audubon. Square 12mo, $1.00.

  BIRDS IN THE BUSH. 16mo, $1.25.

  A RAMBLER’S LEASE. 16mo, $1.25.

  THE FOOT-PATH WAY. 16mo, gilt top, $1.25.

  A FLORIDA SKETCH-BOOK. 16mo, $1.25.

  SPRING NOTES FROM TENNESSEE. 16mo, $1.25.

  A WORLD OF GREEN HILLS. 16mo, $1.25.


  HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN & CO.
  BOSTON AND NEW YORK.




[Illustration: BLUE JAY

_1. Male._ _2, 3. Females_]




  EVERYDAY BIRDS

  ELEMENTARY STUDIES

  BY
  BRADFORD TORREY

  _WITH TWELVE ILLUSTRATIONS IN
  COLORS AFTER AUDUBON, AND
  TWO FROM PHOTOGRAPHS_

  [Illustration]

  BOSTON AND NEW YORK
  HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN AND COMPANY
  The Riverside Press, Cambridge




  COPYRIGHT, 1901, BY BRADFORD TORREY
  ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

  FIFTH IMPRESSION




CONTENTS


                                              PAGE

      I. TWO LITTLE KINGS                        1

     II. THE CHICKADEE                           7

    III. THE BROWN CREEPER                      10

     IV. THE BROWN THRASHER                     15

      V. THE BUTCHER-BIRD                       19

     VI. THE SCARLET TANAGER                    22

    VII. THE SONG SPARROW                       26

   VIII. THE FIELD SPARROW AND THE CHIPPER      30

     IX. SOME APRIL SPARROWS                    35

      X. THE ROSE-BREASTED GROSBEAK             40

     XI. THE BLUE JAY                           43

    XII. THE KINGBIRD                           47

   XIII. THE HUMMINGBIRD                        51

    XIV. THE CHIMNEY SWIFT                      56

     XV. NIGHTHAWK AND WHIP-POOR-WILL           59

    XVI. THE FLICKER                            64

   XVII. THE BITTERN                            68

  XVIII. BIRDS FOR EVERYBODY                    82

    XIX. WINTER PENSIONERS                      87

     XX. WATCHING THE PROCESSION                93

    XXI. SOUTHWARD BOUND                        99

         INDEX                                 105




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                  PAGE

  BLUE JAY                    (page 43) _Frontispiece_

  GOLDEN-CROWNED KINGLET                             2

  CHICKADEE                                          8

  BROWN CREEPER                                     12

  BROWN THRASHER                                    16

  SCARLET TANAGER                                   22

  SONG SPARROW                                      26

  ROSE-BREASTED GROSBEAK                            40

  RUBY-THROATED HUMMINGBIRD                         52

  NIGHTHAWK                                         60

  WHIP-POOR-WILL                                    62

  FLICKER                                           66

_The illustrations entitled A Downy Woodpecker and A Branch
Establishment, facing page 88, are from photographs by Mr. Frank M.
Chapman and were first printed in Bird-Lore._




EVERYDAY BIRDS




I

TWO LITTLE KINGS


The largest bird in the United States is the California vulture, or
condor, which measures from tip to tip of its wings nine feet and a
half. At the other end of the scale are the hummingbirds, one kind of
which, at least, has wings that are less than an inch and a half in
length. Next to these insect-like midgets come the birds which have
been well named in Latin “Regulus,” and in English “kinglets,”--that is
to say, little kings. The fitness of the title comes first from their
tiny size,--the chickadee is almost a giant in comparison,--and next
from the fact that they wear patches of bright color (crowns) on their
heads.

Two species of kinglets are found at one season or another in nearly
all parts of the United States, and are known respectively as the
golden-crown--or goldcrest--and the ruby-crown. The golden-crown
has on the top of its head an orange or yellow patch (sometimes one,
sometimes the other) bordered with black; the ruby-crown wears a very
bright red patch, though you may look at many specimens without finding
it. Only part of the birds have it,--the adult males, perhaps,--and
even those that have it do not always display it. The orange or yellow
of the goldcrest, on the other hand, is worn by all the birds, and is
never concealed. If you are a beginner in bird study, uncertain of
your species, look for the black stripes on the crown. If they are not
there, and the bird is really a kinglet, it must be a ruby-crown. You
may know it, also,--from the goldcrest, I mean,--by what looks like a
light-colored ring round the eye. In fact, one of the ruby-crown’s most
noticeable peculiarities is a certain bareheaded, large-eyed appearance.

Unless your home is near or beyond the northern boundary of the United
States, you need not look for either kinglet in summer. The ruby-crown
is to be seen during its migrations in spring and fall, the goldcrest
in fall, winter, and spring.

[Illustration: GOLDEN-CROWNED KINGLET

_1. Male._ _2. Female_]

At any time of the year they are well worth knowing. Nobody could look
at them without admiration; so pretty, so tiny, and so exceedingly
quick and graceful in their motions. Both species are of a prevailing
greenish or olive shade, with noticeable light-colored wing-bars, and
light, unstreaked, unspotted under parts.

The ruby-crown is famous as a singer. A genuine music-box, we may call
him. In spring, especially, he is often bubbling over with melody; a
rapid, wren-like tune, with sundry quirks and turns that are all his
own; on the whole decidedly original, with plenty of what musical
people call accent and a strongly marked rhythm or swing. Over and
over he goes with it, as if he could never have enough; beginning
with quick, separate, almost guttural notes, and winding up with a
_twittity, twittity, twittity_, which, once heard, is not likely to be
soon forgotten.

A very pleasing vocalist he surely is; and when his extreme smallness
is taken into account he is fairly to be esteemed a musical prodigy.
Every one who has written about the song, from Audubon down, has found
it hard to say enough about it. Audubon goes so far as to say that
it is as powerful as a canary’s, and much more varied and pleasing.
That I must think an exaggeration; natural enough, no doubt, under
the circumstances (romantic surroundings count for a good deal in all
questions of this kind), but still a stretching of the truth. However,
I give but my own opinion. Let my readers hear the bird, and judge
for themselves. They will enjoy him, whether or no. Every such new
acquaintance that a man makes is a new source of lifelong happiness.

The enormous California vulture is said to be almost dumb, having “no
vocal apparatus” and “emitting only a weak hissing sound.” What a
contrast between him and the ruby-crown,--a mere speck of a bird, but
with a musical nature and the voice of an artist. Precious stuff, they
say, comes in small packages. Even the youngest of us may have noticed
that it is always the smaller birds that sing.

But if all the singers are small birds, it is not true that all small
birds are singers. The golden-crowned kinglet, for example, is hardly
to be classed under that head. The gifts of Providence are various,
and are somewhat sparingly dealt out. One creature receives one
gift, another creature another,--just as is true of men, women, and
children. This boy “has an ear,” as the saying goes. He is naturally
musical. Give him a chance, and let him not be too much in love with
something else, and he will make a singer, or a player on instruments,
or possibly a composer. His brother has no ear; he can hardly tell Old
Hundred from Yankee Doodle. It is useless for him to “take lessons.”
He can paint, perhaps, or invent a machine, or make money, or edit a
paper, or teach school, or preach sermons, or practice medicine; but he
will never win a name in the concert room.

The case of the golden-crown is hardly so hopeless as that, I am glad
to believe; for if he is not much of a musician now, as he surely is
not, he is not without some signs of an undeveloped musical capacity.
The root of the matter seems to be in him. He tries to sing, at any
rate, and not unlikely, as time goes on,--say in a million or two of
years,--he may become as capable a performer as the ruby-crown is at
present. There is no telling what a creature may make of himself if
his will is good, and he has astronomical time in which to work. The
dullest of us might learn something with a thousand years of schooling.

What you will mostly hear from the goldcrest is no tune, but a hurried
_zee, zee, zee_, repeated at intervals as he flits about the branches
of a tree, or, less often, through the mazes of a piece of shrubbery.
His activity is wonderful, and his motions are really as good as music.
No dancing could be prettier to look at. All you need is eyes to see
him. But you will have to “look sharp.” Now he is there for an instant,
snatching a morsel or letting out a _zee, zee, zee_. Now he is yonder,
resting upon the air, hovering against a tuft of pine needles, his
wings all in a mist, they beat so swiftly. So through the tree he goes,
and from one tree to another, till presently he is gone for good.

Once in a great while you may find him feeding among the dry leaves
on the ground. Then you can really watch him, and had better make the
most of your opportunity. Or you may catch him exploring bushes or low
savins, which is a chance almost as favorable. The great thing is to
become familiar with his voice. With that help you will find him ten
times as often as without it. He is mostly a bird of the woods, and
prefers evergreens, though he does not confine himself to them.

If you do not know him already, it will be a bright and memorable
day--though it be the dead of winter--when you first see him and are
able to call him by his regal name, _Regulus satrapa_. It is a great
pity that so common and lovely a creature, one of the beauties of the
world, should be unseen by so many good people. It is true, as we say
so often about other things, that they do not know what they miss; but
they miss a good deal, notwithstanding.




II

THE CHICKADEE


The chickadee, like many other birds, takes his name from his notes;
from some of his notes, that is to say, for he has many others besides
his best-known _chick-a-dee-dee-dee_. His most musical effort, regarded
by many observers as his true song, sounds to most ears like the name
Phœbe,--a clear, sweet whistle of two or three notes, with what musical
people call a minor interval between them. It is so strictly a whistle
that any boy can imitate it well enough to deceive not only another
boy, but the bird himself.

In late winter and early spring, especially, when the chickadee is in
a peculiarly cheerful frame of mind, it is very easy to draw him out
by whistling these notes in his hearing. Sometimes, however, the sound
seems to fret or anger him, and instead of answering in kind, he will
fly near the intruder, scolding _dee-dee-dee_.

He remains with us both summer and winter, and wears the same colors at
all seasons.

Perhaps no wild bird is more confiding. If a man is at work in the
woods in cold weather, and at luncheon will take a little pains to feed
the chickadees that are sure to be more or less about him, he will soon
have them tame enough to pick up crumbs at his feet, and even to take
them from his hand.

Better even than crumbs is a bit of mince pie, or a piece of suet. I
have myself held out a piece of suet to a chickadee as I walked through
the woods, and have had him fly down at once, perch on my finger like a
tame canary, and fall to eating. But he was a bird that another man, a
woodcutter of my acquaintance, had tamed in the manner above described.

[Illustration: CHICKADEE

_1. Male._ _2. Female_]

The chickadee’s nest is built in a hole, generally in a decayed stump
or branch. It is very pretty to watch the pair when they are digging
out the hole. All the chips are carried away and dropped at a little
distance from the tree, so that the sight of them littering the ground
may not reveal the birds’ secret to an enemy.

Male and female dress alike. The top of the head is black--for which
reason they are called black-capped chickadees, or black-capped
titmice--and the chin is of the same color, while the cheeks are clear
white. If you are not sure that you know the bird, stay near him till
he pronounces his own name. He will be pretty certain to do it,
sooner or later, especially if you excite him a little by squeaking or
chirping to him.

Although the chickadee is small and delicate-looking, he seems not to
mind the very coldest of weather. Give him enough to eat, and the wind
may whistle. He picks his food, tiny insects, insects’ eggs, and the
like, out of crevices in the bark of trees and about the ends of twigs,
and so is seldom or never without resources. The deepest snows do not
cover up his dinner-table. His worst days, no doubt, are those in which
everything is covered with sleet.

One of his prettiest traits is his skill in hanging back downward from
the tip of a swinging branch or from the under side of a leaf while
in search of provender. As a small boy, who had probably been to the
circus, once said, the chickadee is a “first-rate performer on the
flying trapeze.”




III

THE BROWN CREEPER


In the midst of a Massachusetts winter, when a man with his eyes open
may walk five miles over favorable country roads and see only ten or
twelve kinds of birds, the brown creeper’s faint _zeep_ is a truly
welcome sound. He is a very little fellow, very modestly dressed,
without a bright feather on him, his lower parts being white and his
upper parts a mottling of brown and white, such as a tailor might call
a “pepper and salt mixture.”

The creeper’s life seems as quiet as his colors. You will find him by
overhearing his note somewhere on one side of you as you pass. Now
watch him. He is traveling rather quickly, with an alert, business-like
air, up the trunk of a tree in a spiral course, hitching along inch
by inch, hugging the bark, and every little while stopping to probe a
crevice of it with his long, curved, sharply pointed bill. He is in
search of food,--insects’ eggs, grubs, and what not; morsels so tiny
that it need not surprise us to see him spending the whole day in
satisfying his hunger.

There is one thing to be said for such a life: the bird is never
without something to take up his mind. In fact, if he enjoys the
pleasures of the table half as well as some human beings seem to do,
his life ought to be one of the happiest imaginable.

How flat and thin he looks, and how perfectly his colors blend with the
grays and browns of the mossy bark! No wonder it is easy for us to pass
near him without knowing it. We understand now what learned people mean
when they talk about the “protective coloration” of animals. A hawk
flying overhead, on the lookout for game, must have hard work to see
this bit of a bird clinging so closely to the bark as to be almost a
part of it.

And if a hawk does pass, you may be pretty sure the creeper will see
him, and will flatten himself still more tightly against the tree and
stay as motionless as the bark itself. He needs neither to fight nor to
run away. His strength, as the prophet said, is to sit still.

But look! As the creeper comes to the upper part of the tree, where the
bark is less furrowed than it is below, and therefore less likely to
conceal the scraps of provender that he is in search of, he suddenly
lets go his hold and flies down to the foot of another tree, and begins
again to creep upward. If you keep track of him, you will see him do
this hour after hour. He never walks down. Up, up, he goes, and if you
look sharply enough, you will see that whenever he pauses he makes use
of his sharp, stiff tail-feathers as a rest--a kind of camp-stool, as
it were, or, better still, a bracket. He is built for his work; color,
bill, feet, tail-feathers--all were made on purpose for him.

He is a native of the northern country, and therefore to most readers
of this book he is a winter bird only. If you know his voice, you will
hear him twenty times for once that you see him. If you know neither
him nor his voice, it will be worth your while to make his acquaintance.

When you come upon a little bunch of chickadees flitting through the
woods, listen for a quick, lisping note that is something like theirs,
but different. It may be the creeper’s, for although he seems an
unsocial fellow, seldom flocking with birds of his own kind, he is fond
of the chickadee’s cheerful companionship.

[Illustration: BROWN CREEPER

_1. Male._ _2. Female_]

To see him and hear his _zeep_, you would never take him for a
songster; but there is no telling by the looks of a bird how well he
can sing. In fact, plainly dressed birds are, as a rule, the best
musicians. The very handsome ones have no need to charm with the voice.
And our modest little creeper has a song, and a fairly good one; one
that answers his purpose, at all events, although it may never make him
famous. In springtime it may be heard now and then even in a place like
Boston Common; but of course you must go where the birds pair and nest
if you would hear them at their finest; for birds, like other people,
sing best when they feel happiest.

The brown creeper’s nest used to be something of a mystery. It was
sought for in woodpeckers’ holes. Now it is known that as a general
thing it is built behind a scale of loose bark on a dead tree, between
the bark and the trunk. Ordinarily, if not always, it will be found
under a flake that is loose at the bottom instead of at the top. Into
such a place the female bird packs tightly a mass of twigs and strips
of the soft inner bark of trees, and on the top of this prepares her
nest and lays her eggs. Her mate flits to and fro, keeping her company,
and once in a while cheering her with a song, but so far as has yet
been discovered he takes no hand in the work itself. It is quite
possible that the female, who is to occupy the nest, prefers to have
her own way in the construction of it.

After the young ones are hatched, at all events, the father bird’s
behavior leaves nothing to be complained of. He “comes to time,” as we
say, in the most loyal manner. In and out of the nest he and the mother
go, feeding their hungry charges, making their entry and exit always
at the same point, through the merest crack of a door, between the
overhanging bark and the tree, just above the nest. It is a very pretty
bit of family life.

It would be hard to imagine a nest better concealed from a bird’s
natural enemies, especially when, as is often the case, the tree stands
in water on the edge of a stream or lake. And not only is the nest
wonderfully well hidden, but it is perfectly sheltered from rain, as
it would not be if it were built under a strip of bark that was peeled
from above. All in all, we must respect the simple, demure-looking
creeper as a very clever architect.




IV

THE BROWN THRASHER


The brown thrasher--called also the brown thrush--is a bird
considerably longer than a robin, with a noticeably long tail and a
long, curved bill. His upper parts are reddish brown or cinnamon color,
and his lower parts white or whitish, boldly streaked with black. You
will find him in hedgerows, in scrub-lands, and about the edges of
woods, where he keeps mostly on or near the ground. His general manner
is that of a creature who wishes nothing else so much as to escape
notice. “Only let me alone,” he seems to say. If he sees you coming,
as he pretty certainly will, he dodges into the nearest thicket or
barberry-bush, and waits for you to pass.

Farmers know him as the “planting-bird.” In New England he makes his
appearance with commendable punctuality between the twentieth of April
and the first of May; and while the farmer is planting his garden, the
thrasher encourages him with song. One man, who was planting beans,
imagined that the bird said, “Drop it, drop it! Cover it up, cover it
up!” Perhaps he did. It was good advice, anyhow.

In his own way the thrasher is one of the great singers of the world.
He is own cousin to the famous mockingbird, and at the South, where he
and the mocker may be heard singing side by side,--and so much alike
that it is hard to tell one from the other,--he is known as the “brown
mockingbird.” He would deserve the title but for one thing--he does not
mock. In that respect he falls far short of his gray cousin, who not
only has all the thrasher’s gift of original song, but a most amazing
faculty of imitation, as every one knows who has heard even a caged
mockingbird running over the medley of notes he has picked up here and
there and carefully rehearsed and remembered. The thrasher’s song is a
medley, but not a medley of imitations.

I have said that the thrasher keeps near the ground. Such is his habit;
but there is one exception. When he sings he takes the very top of a
tree, although usually it is not a tall one. There he stands by the
half-hour together, head up and tail down, pouring out a flood of
music; sounds of all sorts, high notes and low notes, smooth notes and
rough notes, all jumbled together in the craziest fashion, as if the
musician were really beside himself.

[Illustration: BROWN THRASHER

_1, 2, 3. Males._ _4. Female_]

It is a performance worth buying a ticket for and going miles to hear;
but it is to be heard without price on the outskirts of almost any
village in the United States east of the Rocky Mountains and south of
Maine. You must go out at the right time, however, for the bird sings
but a few weeks in the year, although he remains in New England almost
six months, or till the middle of October. He is one of the birds that
every one should know, since it is perfectly easy to identify him;
and once known, he is never to be forgotten, or to be confounded with
anything else.

The thrasher’s nest is a rude, careless-looking structure, made of
twigs, roots, and dry leaves, and is to be looked for on the ground,
or in a bush not far above it. Often it has so much the appearance of
a last year’s affair that one is tempted to pass it as unworthy of
notice. I have been fooled in that way more than once.

The bird sits close, as the saying is, and as she stares at you with
her yellow eyes, full at once of courage and fear, you will need a hard
heart to disturb her. Sometimes she will really show fight, and she
has been known to drive a small boy off the field. Her whistle after
she has been frightened from her eggs or nestlings is one of the most
pathetic sounds in nature. I should feel sorry for the boy who could
hear it without pity.

Besides this mournful whistle, the thrasher has a note almost exactly
like a smacking kiss,--very realistic,--and sometimes, especially
at dusk, an uncanny, ghostly whisper, that seems meant expressly to
suggest the presence of something unearthly and awful. So far as I am
aware, there is no other bird-note like it. I have no doubt that many
a superstitious person has taken to his heels on hearing it from the
bushes along a lonesome roadside after nightfall.

Except in the spring, indeed, there is little about the thrasher’s
appearance or behavior to suggest pleasant thoughts. To me, at any
rate, he seems a creature of chronic low spirits. The world has used
him badly, and he cannot get over it. He is almost the only bird I ever
see without a little inspiration of cheerfulness. Perhaps I misjudge
him.

Let my young readers make his acquaintance on their own account, if
they have not already done so, and find him a livelier creature than I
have described him, if they can.




V

THE BUTCHER-BIRD


“Butcher-bird” is not a very pretty name, but it is expressive and
appropriate, and so is likely to stick quite as long as the more
bookish word “shrike,” which is the bird’s other title. It comes from
its owner’s habit of impaling the carcasses of its prey upon thorns, as
a butcher hangs upon a hook the body of a pig or other animal that he
has slaughtered.

In a place like the Public Garden of Boston, if a shrike happens to
make it his hunting-ground for a week or two, you may find here and
there in the hawthorn-trees the body of a mouse or the headless trunk
of an English sparrow spitted upon a thorn. Grasshoppers are said to be
treated in a similar manner, but I have never met with the bird’s work
in the grasshopper season.

The shrike commonly seen in the Northern States is a native of the
far north, and comes down to our latitude only in cold weather. He
travels singly, and if he finds a place to suit him, a place where the
living is good, he will often remain almost in the same spot for weeks
together.

In size and appearance he resembles the mockingbird. His colors are
gray, black, and white, his tail is long, and his bill is hooked like a
hawk’s.

He likes a perch from which he can see a good distance about him. A
telegraph wire answers his purpose very well, but his commonest seat
is the very tip of a tallish tree. If you look across a field in
winter and descry a medium-sized bird swaying on the topmost twig of
a lonesome tree, balancing himself by continual tiltings of his long
tail, you may set him down as most likely a butcher-bird.

His flight is generally not far from the ground, but as he draws near
the tree in which he means to alight, he turns suddenly upward. It
would be surprising to see him alight on one of the lower branches, or
anywhere, indeed, except at the topmost point.

Small birds are all at once scarce and silent when the shrike appears.
Sometimes in his hunger he will attack a bird heavier than himself. I
had once stopped to look at a flicker in a roadside apple-tree, when I
suddenly noticed a butcher-bird not far off. At the same moment, as it
seemed, the butcher-bird caught sight of the flicker, and made a swoop
toward him. The flicker, somewhat to my surprise, showed no sign of
panic, or even of fear. He simply moved aside, as much as to say, “Oh,
stop that! Don’t bother me!” How the affair would have resulted, I
cannot tell. To my regret, the shrike at that moment seemed to become
aware of a man’s presence, and flew away, leaving the woodpecker to
pursue his exploration of the apple-tree at his leisure.

The shrike has a very curious habit of singing, or of trying to sing,
in the disjointed manner of a catbird. I have many times heard him
thus engaged, and can bear witness that some of his tones are really
musical. Some people have supposed that at such times he is trying to
decoy small birds, but to me the performance has always seemed like
music, or an attempt at music, rather than strategy.

Southern readers may be presumed to be familiar with another shrike,
known as the loggerhead. As I have seen him in Florida he is a very
tame, unsuspicious creature, nesting in the shade-trees of towns. The
“French mockingbird,” a planter told me he was called. Mr. Chapman
has seen one fly fifty yards to catch a grasshopper which, to all
appearance, he had sighted before quitting his perch. The power of
flight is not the only point as to which birds have the advantage of
human beings.




VI

THE SCARLET TANAGER


When I began to learn the birds, I was living in a large city. One of
the first things I did, after buying a book, was to visit a cabinet
of mounted specimens--“stuffed birds,” as we often call them. Such a
wonderful and confusing variety as there was to my ignorant eyes! Among
them I remarked especially a gorgeous scarlet creature with black wings
and a black tail. It was labeled the scarlet tanager. So far as I was
concerned, it could not have looked more foreign if it had come from
Borneo. My book told me that it was common in Massachusetts. It _might_
be, I thought, but I had never seen it there. And a bird so splendid as
that! Bright enough to set the woods on fire! How could I have missed
it?

[Illustration: SCARLET TANAGER

_1. Male._ _2. Female_]

Well, there came a Saturday, with its half-holiday for clerks, and I
went into the country, where I betook myself to the woods of my native
village, the woods wherein I had rambled all the years of my boyhood.
And that afternoon, before I came out of them, I put my opera-glass
on two of those wonderful scarlet and black birds. It was a day to be
remembered.

Since that time, of course, I have seen many like them. In one sense,
their beauty has become to me an old story; but I hope that I have set
here and there a reader on a hunt that has been as happily rewarded as
mine was on that bright summer afternoon. In one respect, the beginner
has a great advantage over an old hand. He has the pleasure of more
excitement and surprise.

The bird to be looked for is a little longer than a bluebird, of a
superb scarlet color except for its wings and tail, which, as I have
said, are jet black. I speak of the male in full spring costume. His
mate does not show so much as a red feather, but is greenish yellow, or
yellowish green, with dark--not black--wings and tail.

You may see the tanager once in a while in the neighborhood of your
house, if the grounds are set with shade-trees, but for the most part
he lives in woods, especially in hard woods of a fairly old growth.

One of the first things for you to do, with him as with all birds, is
to acquaint yourself with his call-notes and his song. The call is of
two syllables, and sounds like _chip-chirr_. It is easily remembered
after you have once seen the bird in the act of uttering it. The song
is much in the manner of the robin’s, but less smooth and flowing. I
have often thought, and sometimes said, that it is just such a song as
the robin might give us if he were afflicted with what people call a
“hoarse cold.” The bird sings as if his whole heart were engaged, but
at the same time in a noticeably broken and short-winded style.

The oftener you hear him, the easier you will find it to distinguish
him from a robin, although at first you may find yourself badly at a
loss. A boy that can tell any one of twenty playmates by the tones of
his voice alone will need nothing but practice and attention to do the
same for a great part of the sixty or seventy kinds of common birds
living in the woods and fields about him.

The tanager’s nest is built in a tree, on the flat of a level branch,
so to speak, generally toward the end. Sometimes, at any rate, it is a
surprisingly loose, carelessly constructed thing, through the bottom of
which one can see the blue or bluish eggs while standing on the ground
underneath.

It must be plain to any one that the mother bird, in her dull greenish
dress, is much less easily seen, and therefore much less in danger, as
she sits brooding, than she would be if she wore the flaming scarlet
feathers that render her mate so handsome.

Southern readers will know also another kind of tanager, not red and
black, but red all over. He, too, is a great beauty, although if the
question were left to me, I could not give him the palm over his more
northern relative. The red of the southern bird is of a different
shade--“rose-red” or “vermilion,” the books call it. He sings like the
scarlet tanager, but in a smoother voice. Although he is a red _bird_,
he is not to be confounded with the southern _red_-bird. The latter,
better known as the cardinal grosbeak, is a thick-billed bird of the
sparrow and finch family. He is frequently seen in cages, and is a
royal whistler.

The scarlet tanager--the male in red and black plumage--is not to be
mistaken for anything else in the Eastern States. Once see him, and
you will always know him. For that reason he is an excellent subject
for the beginner. He passes the winter in Central or South America,
and returns to New England in the second week of May. He makes his
appearance in full dress, but later in the season changes it for one
resembling pretty closely the duller plumage of his mate.




VII

THE SONG SPARROW


Sparrows are of many kinds, and in a general way the different kinds
look so much alike that the beginner in bird study is apt to find
them confusing, if not discouraging. They will try his patience, no
matter how sharp and clever he may think himself, and unless he is much
cleverer than the common run of humanity, he will make a good many
mistakes before he gets to the end of them.

One of the best and commonest of them all is the song sparrow. His
upper parts are mottled, of course, since he is a sparrow. His
light-colored breast is sharply streaked, and in the middle of it the
streaks usually run together and form a blotch. His outer tail-feathers
are not white, and there is no yellow on the wings or about the head.
These last points are mentioned in order to distinguish him from two
other sparrows with streaked breasts--the vesper sparrow and the
savanna.

[Illustration: SONG SPARROW

_1. Male._ _2. Female_]

By the middle of March song sparrows reach New England in
crowds,--along with robins and red-winged blackbirds,--and are to be
heard singing on all hands, especially in the neighborhood of water.
They remain until late autumn, and here and there one will be found
even in midwinter.

The song, for which this sparrow is particularly distinguished, is a
bright and lively strain, nothing very great in itself, perhaps, but
thrice welcome for being heard so early in the season, when the ear is
hungry after the long winter silence. Its chief distinction, however,
is its amazing variety. Not only do no two birds sing precisely alike,
but the same bird sings many tunes.

Of this latter fact, which I have known some excellent people to be
skeptical about, you can readily satisfy yourself,--and there is
nothing like knowing a thing at first hand,--if you will take the pains
to keep a singer under your eye at the height of the musical season.
You will find that he repeats one strain for perhaps a dozen times,
without the change of a note; then suddenly he comes out with a song
entirely different. This second song he will in turn drop for a third,
and so on. The bird acts, for all the world, as if he were singing
hymns, of so many verses each, one after another.

It is really a wonderful performance. There are very few kinds of birds
that do anything like it. Of itself it is enough to make the song
sparrow famous, and it is well worth any one’s while to hear it and see
it done. Nobody can see it without believing that birds have a true
appreciation of music. They are better off than some human beings, at
all events. They know one tune from another.

A lady correspondent was good enough to send me, not long ago, a
pleasing account of the doings of a pair of song sparrows, which, as
she says, came to her for six seasons.

“One year,” she writes, “they happened to build where I could watch
them from the window, and they did a very curious thing. They fed the
little birds with all sorts of worms of different colors until they
were ready to leave the nest; then the male brought a pure white moth
and held it near the nest, which was in some stems of a rosebush a few
inches from the ground, on a level with the lower rail of a picket
fence.

“One of the little birds came out of the nest at once and followed its
parent, who went sidewise, always holding the dazzling white morsel
just out of the youngster’s reach. In this manner they crossed the
lane, climbed the inclined plane of a woodpile, and passed through a
fence and across a vegetable garden into an asparagus bed, in which
miniature forest the little traveler received and ate the moth.

“Another nest was built on the bank of a brook on the farther side of
a road. Out of this nest I saw two little fellows coaxed with these
snow-white moths, and led across the dusty road into a hedge.”

One or two experiences of this kind are sufficient reward for a good
deal of patient observation. The singer of this pair of birds, my
correspondent says, had ten distinct songs, one of them exceedingly
beautiful and peculiar.

The song sparrow’s nest is usually built on the ground, and the bird is
one of several kinds that are known indiscriminately by country people
as ground sparrows.

Song sparrows seem to be of a pretty nervous disposition, to judge from
their behavior. One of their noticeable characteristics is a twitching,
up-and-down, “pumping” motion of the tail, as they dash into cover on
being disturbed.

People who live in the Southern States see these birds only in the
cooler part of the year, but must have abundant opportunity to hear
them sing as spring approaches.




VIII

THE FIELD SPARROW AND THE CHIPPER


All beginners in bird study find the sparrow family a hard one.
There are so many kinds of sparrows, and the different kinds look so
confusingly alike. How shall I ever be able to tell them apart? the
novice says to himself.

Well, there is no royal road to such learning, it may as well be
confessed. But there is a road, for all that, and a pretty good
one,--the road of patience; and there is much pleasure to be had
in following it. If you know one sparrow, be it only the so-called
“English,” you have made a beginning.

_If_ you know the English sparrow, I say; for, strange as it may seem,
I find numbers of people who do not. Take the average inhabitant of any
of our large cities into the country, and let him come upon an English
sparrow in a wayside hedge, and there are three chances to one that he
will not know with certainty what to call it. Quite as likely as not he
has never noticed that there are two kinds of English sparrows, very
differently feathered--the male and the female.

In a short chapter like this I am not going to attempt a miracle. If
you read it to the end, never so carefully, you will not be prepared to
name all the sparrows at sight. As I said before, they are a hard set.
My wish now is to speak of two of the smallest and commonest.

One of these is called sometimes the chipping sparrow, sometimes
the chipper, and sometimes--much less often--the doorstep sparrow.
Personally, I like the last name best,--perhaps because I invented it.
Scientific men, who prefer for excellent reasons to have their own
names for things, call him _Spizella socialis_--that is to say, the
familiar or social little spiza, or sparrow. The idea of littleness,
some young readers may not know, is contained in the termination
_ella_, which is what grammarians call a diminutive. Umbrella, for
instance, is literally a small _umbra_, or shade.

With most readers of this book the chipping sparrow is a bird of
spring, summer, and autumn. For the winter he retires to our extreme
Southern States and to Mexico. If you live in Massachusetts, you may
begin to be on the watch for him by the 5th of April. If your home is
farther south, you should see him somewhat earlier.

Perhaps you will know him by this brief description: a very small,
slender sparrow, with a dark chestnut-red crown, a black forehead, a
black bill, and plain--unstreaked and unspotted--under parts.

His ordinary note, or call, is a _chip_ (whence his name), and his song
is a very dry, tuneless, monotonous, long-drawn _chippy-chippy-chippy_,
uttered so fast as to sound almost like a trill. You may like the bird
never so well, but if you have any idea of music, you will never call
him a fine singer. What he and his mate think about the matter there
is, of course, no telling. He seems to be very much in earnest, at all
events.

He is a social bird, I say. You will not have to go far afield or
into the woods in search of him. If you live in any sort of country
place, with a bit of garden and a few shrubs and fruit trees, a pair of
chippers will be likely to find you out. Their nest will be built in a
tree or bush, a small structure neatly lined with hair, and in due time
it will contain four or five eggs, blue or greenish blue, with brown
spots.

Our other bird is of the chipper’s size, and, like him, has unstreaked
and unspotted lower parts. His bill is of a light color, “reddish
brown,” one book says, “pale reddish,” says another. This is one of the
principal marks for the beginner to notice. Another is a wash of buff,
or yellowish brown, on the sides of the breast. The upper parts, too,
are in general much lighter than the chipper’s.

You will not be likely often to find this bird in your garden or about
the lawn. He is called the field sparrow, but he lives mostly in dry
old pastures, partly overgrown with bushes and trees. His nest is
placed on the ground, or in a low bush, and is often lined wholly or in
part with hair. He and the chipper belong to what is called the same
genus. That is to say, the two are so nearly related that they have the
same surname. The chipper is _Spizella socialis_, the field sparrow is
_Spizella pusilla_; just as two brothers will have one name in common,
say, Jones, William, and Jones, Andrew.

The chipper is a favorite on account of his familiar, friendly ways.
The field sparrow deserves to be known and loved for his music. Few
birds sing better, in my opinion, though many make more display and
are more talked about. The beauty of the song is in its sweetness,
simplicity, and perfect taste. It begins with three or four longer
notes, which run at once into quicker and shorter ones, either on the
same pitch or a little higher. Really the strain is almost too simple
to make a description of: a simple line of pure melody, one may say.
You must hear it for yourself. Sometimes the bird gives it out double,
so to speak, catching it up again just as he seems ready to finish.
The tone is the clearest of whistles, and the whole effect is most
delightful and soothing. It is worth anybody’s while to spend a season
or two in bird study, if only to learn this and half a dozen more
pieces of our common wild-bird music.

The field sparrow’s times of arrival and departure are practically the
same as the chipper’s. Neither bird is hard to see, or very hard to
distinguish; a bit of patience and an opera-glass will do the business;
though you may have to puzzle awhile over either of them before making
quite sure of your knowledge. In bird study, as in any other, we learn
by correcting our own mistakes.




IX

SOME APRIL SPARROWS


For the first three weeks of April the ornithologist goes comparatively
seldom into the woods. Millions of birds have come up from the South,
but the forest is still almost deserted. May, with its hosts of
warblers, will bring a grand change in this respect; meanwhile the
sparrows are in the ascendant, and we shall do well to follow the road
for the most part, though with frequent excursions across fields and
into gardens and orchards. Of eighty-four species of birds seen by me
in April, a year ago, twenty-one were water birds, and of the remaining
sixty-three, twenty, or almost one third, were members of the sparrow
family, while only five were warblers. In May, on the other hand, out
of one hundred and twenty-five species seen twenty-three were warblers,
and only eighteen were sparrows. To represent the case fairly, however,
the comparison should be by individuals rather than by species, and
for such a comparison I have no adequate data. My own opinion is that
of all the birds commonly seen in April, more than half, perhaps as
many as four fifths, are members of the sparrow family. There are days,
indeed, when the song sparrows alone seem to outnumber all other birds,
and other days when the same is true of the snowbirds.

The large and noble sparrow family, which includes not only the
sparrows, commonly so called, but finches, grosbeaks, crossbills,
snowbirds, buntings, and the like, is represented in North America by
more than ninety species, and in Massachusetts by about forty. It is
preëminently a musical family, and, with us at least, April is the
best month of the twelve in which to appreciate its lyrical efforts,
notwithstanding the fact that one of its most distinguished songsters,
the rose-breasted grosbeak, is still absent.

Among the more gifted of its April representatives are the fox
sparrow,--so named from his color,--the purple finch, the song sparrow,
the vesper sparrow, the tree sparrow, the field sparrow, and the
white-throated sparrow--seven common birds, every one of them deserving
to be known by any who care for sweet sounds.

One of the seven, the purple finch, also called the linnet, is
unlike all the others, and easily excels them all in the fluency and
copiousness of his music. He is readily distinguishable--in adult male
plumage--as a sparrow whose head and neck appear to have been dipped in
carmine ink, or perhaps in pokeberry juice. His song is a prolonged,
rapid, unbroken warble, which he is much given to delivering while on
the wing, hovering ecstatically and singing as if he would pour out
his very soul. He is a familiar bird, a lover of orchards and roadside
trees, but is not so universally distributed, probably, as most of the
other species I have named.

In contrast with the purple finch, all the six sparrows here mentioned
with him have brief and rather formal songs. Those of the fox sparrow
and the tree sparrow bear a pretty strong resemblance to each other,
especially as to cadence or inflection; the song sparrow’s and the
vesper sparrow’s are still more closely alike, and will almost
certainly confuse the novice, while those of the field sparrow and the
white-throat are each quite unique.

The fox sparrow visits Massachusetts as a migrant only, and the same
might be said of the white-throat, only that it breeds in Berkshire
County and single birds are often seen in the eastern part of the State
during the winter. The tree sparrow is a winter resident, going far
north to rear its young, and the remaining four species are with us for
the summer.

The fox sparrow is to be heard from the 20th of March (I speak
roughly) to the middle of April. In respect to voice and cadence, he
is to me the finest of our sparrows proper, though I do not think
him so finished an artist as the song and vesper sparrows. He may be
recognized by his superior size and his bright rusty-red (reddish
brown) color. Indeed, these two features give him at first sight the
appearance of a thrush. He is one of the sparrows--like the song, the
vesper, the savanna, and the Ipswich--which are thickly streaked upon
the breast.

The tree sparrow passes the winter with us, as I have said, but abounds
only during the two migrations. He is in full song for the greater
part of April. His distinctive marks are a bright reddish (“chestnut”)
crown, conspicuous white wing-bars, and an obscure round blotch in the
middle of his unstreaked breast.

The white-throat, commonly a very abundant migrant, arrives about the
20th of April and remains till about the middle of May. His loud,
clear song is remarkable for its peculiar and strongly marked rhythm.
It consists of two comparatively long introductory notes, followed by
three sets of triplets in monotone--like _see, see, peabody, peabody,
peabody_. This bird, too, perplexing as the sparrows are usually
thought to be, is perfectly well marked, with a white throat (not
merely a white chin, as in the swamp sparrow) and a broad white stripe
on each side of the crown, turning to yellow in front of the eyes. The
crown itself is dark, with a white line through the middle, and each
wing is adorned with two white bars. In size the white-throat comes
next to the fox sparrow.

The song sparrow and the vesper sparrow not only sing alike, but look
alike. The latter may be told at once, however, by his white outer
tail-feathers, which show as he flies. These are two of our commonest
and worthiest birds. The vesper sparrow, more generally known, perhaps,
as the bay-winged bunting, likes a drier field than the song sparrow,
and is especially noticeable for his trick of running along the path or
the road directly in front of the traveler.




X

THE ROSE-BREASTED GROSBEAK


There is never a May passes, of recent years, but some one comes to me,
or writes to me, to inquire about a wonderfully beautiful bird that he
has just seen for the first time. He does hope I can tell him what it
is. It is a pretty large bird, he goes on to say,--but not so long as a
robin, he thinks, if I question him,--mostly black and white, but with
such a splendid rosy patch on his breast or throat! What can it be?
He had no idea that anything so handsome was ever to be seen in these
parts.

If all the questions that people ask about birds were as easily
answered as this one, I should be thankful. It is a rose-breasted
grosbeak, I tell the inquirer. Perhaps he noticed that its bill was
uncommonly stout. If he did, the fact is exceptional, for somehow the
shape of the bill is a point which the average person seems very seldom
to notice, although it is highly important. Anyhow, the rosebreast’s
beak is most decidedly “gross.” And he is every whit as beautiful as
my inquirer represents him to be. In that respect he ranks with the
oriole and the scarlet tanager.

[Illustration: ROSE-BREASTED GROSBEAK

_1. Males._ _2. Female._ _3. Young Male_]

He is distinguished also for his song, which is a flowing warble,
wonderfully smooth and sweet. To most ears it bears a likeness to the
robin’s song, but it is beyond comparison more fluent and delicious,
although not more hearty. Keep your ear open for such a voice,--by the
middle of May if you live in New England, a little earlier if your home
is farther south,--and you will be likely to hear it; for at that time
the bird is not only common, but a very free singer.

In addition to his song, the rosebreast has a short call-note, which
sounds very much like the squeak of a pair of rusty shears--a kind of
_hic_, which you will find no difficulty about remembering if you have
once learned it. His nest is generally built in a bush, often within
reach of the hand, but I have seen it well up in a rather tall tree.
The two birds spell each other in brooding, and are not only mutually
affectionate, but very brave. I have known the mother bird to keep her
seat even when I took hold of the bush below the nest and drew her
almost against my face. She, by the way, is a very modestly dressed
body, being not only without the rose-color, but without the clear
contrast of black and white. To look at her, you might take her for a
large sparrow.

The rose-color of the male, it should be said, is not confined to the
patch on the breast, but is found also on the lining of the wings,
where it is mostly unnoticed by the world, but where his mate, of
course, cannot help admiring it as he flutters about her; for it is
certain that female birds have a good eye for color, and believe that
fine feathers help, at least, to make fine birds. The shade is of
the brightest and most exquisite, and the total effect of the male’s
plumage--jet black, pure white, and vivid rose-red--is quite beyond
praise.

The birds, happily, are not shy, and prefer a fairly open or broken
country rather than a dense wood. Last season one sang day after day
directly under my windows, and undoubtedly had a mate and a nest
somewhere close by. The male, it should be added, has the very pretty
though dangerous-seeming habit of singing as he sits upon the eggs.




XI

THE BLUE JAY


Some years ago, as the story comes to me, two collectors of birds met
by accident in South America, one of them from Europe, the other from
the United States. “There is one bird that I would rather see than any
other in the world,” said the European. “It is the handsomest of all
the birds that fly, to my thinking, although I know it only in the
cabinet. You have it in North America, but I suppose you do not often
see it. I mean the blue jay.”

What the American answered in words, I do not know; but I am pretty
confident that he smiled. The European might almost as well have said
that he supposed Boston people did not often see an English sparrow.
Not that the blue jay swarms everywhere as the foreign sparrow swarms
in our American cities; but it is so common, so noisy, so conspicuous,
and so unmistakable, that it is, or ought to be, almost an everyday
sight to all country dwellers.

Strange as it seems, however, I find many people who do not know the
jay when they see it. In late winter, say toward the end of February,
when I begin to be on the lookout for the first bluebird of the year,
I am all but certain to have word brought to me by some one of the
village school-teachers that bluebirds have already come. Johnny This
or Jimmy That saw one near his house several weeks ago! That “several
weeks ago” makes me suspicious, and on following up the matter I
discover that John and James have seen a large blue bird, larger than a
robin, with some black and white on him--_all_ white underneath--_and_
wearing a tall crest or topknot. Then I know that they have mistaken a
blue _bird_ for a _blue_bird. They have seen a blue jay, a bird of a
very different feather. He has been with us all winter, as he always
is, and has been in sight from my windows daily. So easy is it for boys
and men to guess at things, and guess wrong.

The jay is a relative of the crow, and has much of the crow’s
cleverness, with more than the crow’s beauty. Like the crow, if he
has an errand near houses, he makes a point of doing it in the early
morning before the folks who live in the houses have begun to stir
about. In fact, he knows us, in some respects at least, better than we
know him, and habitually takes advantage of what no doubt seems to him
a custom of very late rising on the part of human beings.

Among small birds of all sorts he bears a decidedly bad name. In
nesting time you may hear them uttering a chorus of loud and bitter
laments as often as he appears among them. Their eggs and young are
in danger, and they join forces to worry him and drive him away. One
bird sounds the alarm, another hears him and hastens to see what is
going on, and in a few minutes the whole neighborhood is awake. And it
stays awake till the jay moves off. After that piece of evidence, you
do not need to _see_ him doing mischief. The little birds’ behavior is
sufficiently convincing. As Thoreau said, the presence of a trout in
the milk is something like proof.

And jays, in their turn, club together against enemies larger than
themselves. Last autumn I was walking through the woods with a
friend,--a city schoolmaster eager for knowledge, as every schoolmaster
ought to be,--when we heard a great screaming of blue jays from a
swampy thicket on our right hand.

“Now what do you suppose the birds mean by all that outcry?” said my
friend.

I answered that very likely there was a hawk or an owl there.

“Let’s go and see,” said the master, and we turned in that direction.
Sure enough, we soon came face to face with a large hen-hawk perched in
one of the trees, while the jays, one after another, were dashing as
near him as they dared, yelling at him as they passed.

At our nearer approach the hawk took wing; then the jays disappeared,
and silence fell upon the woods. And I dare say the schoolmaster gave
me credit for being a wondrously wise man!

The jay has many notes, and once in a great while may even be heard
indulging in something like a warble. One of his most musical calls
sounds to my ears a little like the word “lily.”

He seems to be very fond of acorns, and is frequently to be seen
standing upon a limb, holding an acorn under his claw and hammering it
to pieces with all the force of his stout bill. When angered, he scolds
violently, bobbing up and down in a most ridiculous manner. In fact, he
is of a highly nervous temperament, and as full of gesticulations as a
Frenchman.

To me he is especially a bird of autumn. At that season the woods are
loud with his clarion, and as I listen to it I can often feel myself a
boy again, rambling in the woods that knew me in my school-days. With
all his faults--his ill treatment of small birds, I mean--I should be
sorry to have his numbers greatly diminished.




XII

THE KINGBIRD


As a very small boy I spent much time in a certain piece of rather
low ground partly grown up to bushes. Here in early spring I picked
bunches of pretty pink and white flowers, which I now know to have been
anemones. In the same place, a month or two later, I gathered splendid
red lilies, and admired, without gathering it, a tiny blue flower with
a yellow centre. This would not bear taking home, but was always an
attraction to me. I should have liked it better still, I am sure, if
some one had been kind enough to tell me its pretty name--blue-eyed
grass.

Here, also, I picked the first strawberries of the season and the first
blueberries. They were luxuries indeed. A “gill-cup” full of either of
them was good pay for an hour’s search.

In one corner of the place there were half a dozen or so of
apple-trees, and on the topmost branches of these there used to perch
continually two or three birds of a kind which some older boy told me
were kingbirds. At these my brother and I--both of us small enough to
be excusable for such mischief--were in the habit of throwing green
apples; partly to see how near we could come to hitting them, partly
for the fun of watching them rise into the air, circle about with sharp
cries, and then settle back upon the perches they had left. Sometimes
we stuck the half-grown apple on the end of a stick, swung the stick
round our heads, and sent the apple flying to a tremendous distance.
Stick or no stick, however, we were in no danger of killing anything,
as I am glad now to remember.

What amazed us was that the birds did not go away. No matter how long
we “appled” them, they were certain to be on hand the next day in the
same place. We must have been very young and very green,--greener even
than the apples,--for it never occurred to us that the birds had nests
in the trees, and for that reason were not to be driven away by our
petty persecutions.

Even then I noticed the peculiar flight of the birds--the short, quick
strokes of their wings, and their habit of hovering. These are among
the signs by which the kingbird can be recognized a long way off. He
is dark-colored above,--almost black,--pure white underneath, and his
tail, when outspread, shows a broad white border at the tip. On his
crown is an orange-red patch, but you will probably never see it unless
you have the bird in your hand and brush apart the feathers in search
of it.

The kingbird’s Latin name has much the same meaning as his common
English one. _Tyrannus tyrannus_ he is called by scientific people. He
belongs to a family known as flycatchers, birds that catch insects on
the wing. That is the reason why the kingbird likes a perch at the tip
of something, so that he can dart out after a passing insect, catch it,
and return to his perch to wait for another. _I_ should call him the
“apple-tree flycatcher,” if the matter were referred to me.

He is not large,--little bigger than an English sparrow,--but he has
plenty of courage and a strong disposition to “rule the roost,” as the
saying goes. Every country boy has laughed to see the kingbird chasing
a crow. And a very lively and pleasing sight it is: the crow making for
the nearest wood as fast as his wings will carry him, and one or two
kingbirds in hot pursuit. Their great aim is to get above him and swoop
down upon his back. Sometimes you will see one actually alight on a
crow’s back and, as boys say, “give it to him” in great style.

Another taking action of the kingbird is his trick of flying straight
up in the air, almost perpendicularly, as if he were trying to see
how near he could come to performing that impossible feat, and then
tumbling about madly, with noisy outcries. Often it looks as if he
actually turned somersaults. He cannot sing, and so has to let his high
spirits bubble over in these half-crazy gymnastics. All in all, he is a
very lively and entertaining customer.

His nest is built in a tree, often in an orchard, and is comparatively
easy to find. The birds arrive in New England in the first week of May,
having passed the winter in Central or South America, and remain till
the end of August.

Like most birds, they are very punctual in their coming and going. No
doubt they have an almanac of their own. You will do well to find one
of them in Massachusetts after the first two or three days of September.

Toward the end of their stay, flycatchers though they are, they feed
largely upon berries. I have seen a dozen in one small dogwood bush,
all eating greedily.




XIII

THE HUMMINGBIRD


Hummingbirds are found only in America and on the islands near it.
They are of many kinds, but only one kind is ever seen in the eastern
United States. This is known as the ruby-throated hummingbird, because
of a splendid red throat-patch worn by the male. To speak more exactly,
the patch is red only in some lights. You see it one instant as black
as a coal, and the next instant it flashes like a coal on fire. This
ornament,--a real jewel,--with the lovely shining green of the bird’s
back, makes him an object of great beauty.

Every one knows him, or would do so only that some people confuse him
with bright-colored, long-tongued hummingbird moths that are seen
hovering, mostly in the early evening, over the flowers of the garden.

The ruby-throat spends the winter south of the United States. He
arrives in Florida in March, but does not reach New England till near
the middle of May.

Many persons seem to imagine that the hummer lives on the wing. They
have never seen one sitting still, they say. But the truth is that
hummingbirds pass but a small part of the time in the air. They are so
very small, however, that they are easily overlooked on a branch of a
tree, and the average person never notices them except when the hum of
their wings attracts his attention.

One of the prettiest sights in the world is a hummingbird hovering
before a blossom, his wings vibrating so fast as to make a mist about
him, and his long needle of a bill probing the flower with quick, eager
thrusts. All his movements are of lightning-like rapidity, and even
while your eyes are on him he is gone like a flash, you cannot say
whither.

The hummingbird’s nest is built on a branch of a tree,--saddled on
it,--and is not very hard to find after you have once seen one, and so
have learned precisely what to look for. Generally it is placed well
out towards the end of the limb. I have found it on pitch-pines in the
woods, on roadside maples,--shade-trees,--and especially in apple and
pear orchards. The mother bird is very apt to betray its whereabouts by
buzzing about the head of any one who comes near it.

[Illustration: RUBY-THROATED HUMMINGBIRD

_1, 2. Males. 3. Female. 4. Young_]

Last May, for example, I stopped in the middle of the road to listen
for the voice of a house wren, when I caught instead the buzz and
squeak of a hummer. Turning my gaze upward, I saw her fly to a
half-built nest on a maple branch directly over my head.

The nest is a tiny thing, looking for size and shape like a cup out
of a child’s toy tea-set. Its walls are thick, and on the outside are
covered--shingled, we may say--with bits of gray lichen, which help to
make the nest look like nothing more than a knot. Whether they are put
on for that purpose, or by way of ornament, is more than I can tell.

The bird always lays two white eggs, about as large as peas. The young
ones stay in the nest for three weeks, more or less, till they are
fully grown and fledged, and perfectly well able to fly. I once saw
one take his first flight, and a great venture it seemed. All these
three weeks, and for another week afterward, the mother--no father is
present--has her hands full to supply the little things with food,
which she gives them from her crop, thrusting her long, sharp bill
clean down their throats in the process, in a way to make a looker-on
shiver. The only note I have ever heard from the ruby-throat is a
squeak, which seems to be an expression of nervousness or annoyance,
and is uttered whenever an intruder--a man, a cat, or a strange
bird--comes near the tree in which her treasures are hidden.

Hummingbirds sometimes fly into open windows and are caught. At such
times they become tame almost at once, but it is difficult, if not
impossible, to keep them alive in captivity, and it is cruel to attempt
it, except when the little creature is injured and plainly unable to
look out for itself.

A lady of my acquaintance discovered a hummingbird under her piazza. It
had flown in by accident, probably, and now was darting to and fro in
a frantic attempt to get out. The piazza was open on three sides, to
be sure, but the frightened bird kept up against the ceiling, and of
course found itself walled in.

Fearful that it would injure itself, the lady brought a broom and tried
to force it to come down and so discover its way out; but it was only
the more scared. Then a happy thought came to her. She went to the
garden, plucked a few flowers, and going back to the piazza, set them
down for the bird to see. Instantly it flew toward them, and as it did
so it saw the open world without, and away it went.

Another lady wrote me once a very pretty story of a hummer that came
and probed a nasturtium which she held in her hand.

It is wonderful to think that so tiny a bird, born in New England or in
Canada in June, should travel to Cuba or Central America in the autumn,
and the next spring find its way back again to its birthplace.




XIV

THE CHIMNEY SWIFT


Every kind of bird is adapted to get its living in a particular way.
It is strong in some respects, and weak in others. Some birds have
powerful legs, but can hardly fly; others live on the wing, and can
hardly walk. Of these flying birds none is more common than the chimney
swift, or, as he is improperly called, the chimney swallow. No one ever
saw him sitting on a perch or walking on the ground. In fact, his wings
are so long, and his legs so short and weak, that if he were to alight
on the ground, he would probably never be able to rise into the air
again.

He hardly seems to need a description, and yet I suppose that many
persons, not to say people in general, do not know him from a swallow.
His color is sooty brown, turning to gray on the throat. His body, as
he is seen in the air, is shaped like a bobbin, bluntly pointed at both
ends. If he is carefully watched, however, it will be noticed that
he spreads his tail for an instant whenever he changes suddenly the
direction of his flight. In other words, he uses his tail as a rudder.

He shoots about the sky at a tremendous speed, much of the time
sailing, with his long, narrow wings firmly set, and is especially
lively and noisy toward nightfall. Very commonly two or three of the
birds fly side by side, cackling merrily and acting very much as if
they were amusing themselves with some kind of game.

They feed on the wing, and have wide, gaping mouths perfectly adapted
to that purpose.

As their name implies, they build their nests and pass the night mostly
in chimneys, although in the wilder parts of the country they still
inhabit hollow trees. Numbers of pairs live together in a colony.

One of the chimneys of a certain house near the Charles River, in
Newton, Massachusetts, has for many years been a favorite resort of
swifts. I have many times visited the place to watch the birds go to
roost. Little by little they gather in a flock, as twilight comes on,
and then for an hour or more the whole company, hundreds in number,
go sweeping over the valley in broad circles, having the chimney for
a centre. Gradually the circles become narrower, and at the same
time the excitement of the flock increases. Again and again the birds
approach the chimney, as if they meant to descend into it. Then away
they shoot for another round.

At length the going to roost actually begins. Half a dozen or a dozen
of the birds drop one by one into the chimney. The rest sweep away, and
when they come back, a second detachment drops in. And so the lively
performance goes on till the last straggler folds his wings above the
big black cavity and tumbles headlong out of sight.

The swift makes his nest of twigs, and as he cannot alight on the
ground in search of them, he is compelled to gather them from the dead
limbs of trees. Over and over again you will see the bird dart against
such a limb, catching at a twig as he pauses for the merest instant
before it. It is difficult to be sure whether he succeeds or not, his
movements are so rapid, but it is certain that he must often fail.
However, he acts upon the old motto, “Try, try again,” and in course of
time the nest is built. And an extremely pretty nest it is, with the
white eggs in it, the black twigs glued firmly together with the bird’s
own saliva.




XV

NIGHTHAWK AND WHIP-POOR-WILL


Rustic people are a little shy of theories and “book-learning.” Not
long ago--it was early in March--I met an old man who lives by himself
in a kind of hermitage in the woods, and who knows me in a general way
as a bird student. We greeted each other, and I inquired whether he had
seen any bluebirds yet. No, he said, it wasn’t time.

“Oh, but they are here,” I answered. “I saw a flock of ten on the 26th
of February.” Good-natured incredulity came out all over his face.

“Did you hear them sing?” he asked.

“Yes,” said I; “and, furthermore, I saw some this forenoon very near
your house.”

“Well,” he remarked, “according to my experience, it is too early for
bluebirds. Besides, they never go in flocks; and when anybody tells
me at this time of the year that he has seen a flock of bluebirds, I
always know that he has seen some blue snowbirds.”

He spoke with an air of finality which left me nothing to do but to
smile and pass on.

This little incident called to mind another, and that put it into my
head to write this article.

A farmer, who had seen me passing his house and loitering about
his lanes and fields for several years, often with an opera-glass
in my hand, one day hailed me to ask whether the nighthawk and the
whip-poor-will were the same bird, as he had heard people say. I
assured him (or rather I told him--it turned out that I had not made
him sure) that they were quite distinct, and proceeded to remark
upon some of the more obvious points of difference between the two,
especially as to their habits and manner of life. He listened with all
deference to what I had to offer, but as I concluded and turned to
leave him, he said: “Well, some folks _say_ they’re the same. They say
one’s the he one and t’ other’s the she one; but I guess they ain’t.”

Verily, thought I, popular science lectures are sometimes a failure.
Not long afterward I was telling the story to a Massachusetts man, a
man who had made a collection of birds’ eggs in his time.

“Why,” said he, “aren’t they the same? I always understood that they
were the male and female of the same species. That was the common
belief where I was brought up.”

[Illustration: NIGHTHAWK]

The confusion of the two birds is widespread, in spite of Audubon’s
testimony that he had seldom seen a farmer or even a boy in the United
States who did not know the difference between them. But, while they
resemble each other closely, they are sufficiently unlike to be
classified not only as separate species, but as species of different
genera. As for the difference in their habits, it is such as any one
may see and appreciate. The nighthawk, for all its name, is not a night
bird. It is most active at twilight,--in other words, it is crepuscular
instead of nocturnal,--but is often to be seen flying abroad at midday.
The whip-poor-will, on the contrary, is quiet till after dark. Then
it starts into fullness of life, singing with the utmost enthusiasm,
till the listener wonders where it can find breath for such rapid and
long-continued efforts. The nighthawk is not a musician. While flying
it frequently utters a single note, of a guttural-nasal quality, almost
indistinguishable from the so-called bleat of the woodcock; but, in
place of singing, it indulges in a fine aerial tumbling performance,
much in the manner of the snipe. This performance I have many times
observed in early summer from the Public Garden in Boston. I have
seen it also in September, though it is doubtless much less common at
that season. The bird rises gradually to a considerable height, and
presently drops like a stone almost to the ground. At the last moment
it arrests itself suddenly, and then is heard a very peculiar “booming”
noise, whether produced by the wings or by the voice, I will not
presume to say.

The most attractive feature of the nighthawk, to my eye, is its
beautiful and peculiar flight--a marvel of ease and grace, and
sufficient to distinguish it at a glance from every other New England
bird. It is a creature of the upper air, never skimming the ground, so
far as I know, and as it passes overhead you may easily see the large
white patch in the middle of each long wing--a beauty spot, by the way,
which is common to both sexes, and is wanting in the whip-poor-will.

[Illustration: WHIP-POOR-WILL]

The whip-poor-will’s chief distinction is its song--a song by itself,
and familiar to every one. Some people call it mournful, and I fear
there are still a few superstitious souls who listen to it with a
kind of trembling. I have heard of the bird’s being shot because the
inhabitants of a house could not bear its doleful and boding cry, as
they were pleased to consider it. To my ears it is sweet music. I take
many an evening stroll on purpose to enjoy it, and am perennially
thankful to Audubon for saying that he found the whip-poor-will’s
“cheering voice” more interesting than the song of the nightingale.

It will surprise unscientific readers to be told that the nearest
relatives of whip-poor-wills and nighthawks are the swifts and the
hummingbirds. As if a chimney swift were more like a whip-poor-will
than like a swallow! and, still more absurd, as if there were any
close relationship between whip-poor-wills and hummingbirds! Put
a whip-poor-will and a ruby-throated hummer side by side and they
certainly do look very little alike--the big whip-poor-will, with its
mottled plumage and its short, gaping beak, and the tiny hummingbird
with its burnished feathers and its long needle of a bill. Evidently
there is no great reliance to be placed upon outside show, or what
scientific men call “external characters.” We might as well say that
the strawberry vine and the apple-tree were own cousins. Yes, so we
might, for the apple-tree and the strawberry vine _are_ cousins--at
least they are members of the same great and noble family, the family
of the roses! We shall never get far, in science or in anything else,
until we learn to look below the surface.




XVI

THE FLICKER


The flicker is the largest of our common American woodpeckers, being
somewhat longer and stouter than the robin. It is known, by sight
at least, to almost every one who notices birds at all, and perhaps
for this reason it has received an unusual number of popular names.
“Golden-winged woodpecker,” which is probably the best known of these,
comes from the fact that the bird’s wings are yellow on the under side.
“Harry Wicket,” “Highhole,”--because its nest is sometimes pretty far
above the ground,--“Yellowhammer,” and “Pigeon-woodpecker” are also
among its more familiar nicknames.

Unlike other birds of its family, the flicker passes much of its time
on the ground, where it hops awkwardly about, feeding upon insects,
especially upon ants. As you come near it, while it is thus engaged, it
rises with a peculiar purring sound, and as it flies from you it shows
a broad white patch on its rump--the lower back, above the root of
the tail. Every one who has ever walked much over grassy fields must
have seen the bird and been struck by this conspicuous light mark. He
must have noticed, too, the bird’s peculiar up-and-down, “jumping”
manner of flight, by which it goes swooping across the country in long
undulations or waves.

The flicker’s general color is brown, with spottings and streakings
of black, and more or less of violet or lilac shading. On the back of
its neck it wears a band of bright scarlet, and across its breast is a
conspicuous black crescent.

It is fond of old apple orchards, and often makes its nest in a
decaying trunk. In some places, near the seashore, especially,--where
it is commoner than elsewhere in winter, and where large trees are
scarce,--it makes enemies by its habit of drilling holes in barns and
even in churches. I remember a meeting-house on Cape Cod which had a
good number of such holes in its front wall--or rather it had the scars
of such holes, for they had been covered with patches of tin. That was
a case where going to church might be called a bad habit.

In fall and winter, if not at other seasons, the flicker feeds largely
upon berries. In years when the poison ivy bears a good crop, I am
pretty sure to find two or three flickers all winter long about a
certain farm, the stone walls of which are overrun with this handsome
but unwholesome vine, although it is hard to imagine that the dry,
stony fruit should yield much in the way of nourishment, even to a
woodpecker.

As spring comes on, the flicker becomes numerous and very noisy. His
best-known vocal effort is a prolonged _hi-hi-hi_, very loud and
ringing, and kept up until the listener wonders where the author of it
gets his wind. This, I think, is the bird’s substitute for a song. He
has at all times a loud, unmusical _yawp_,--a signal, I suppose,--and
in the mating season especially he utters a very affectionate,
conversational _wicker_ or _flicker_. Every country boy should be
familiar with these three notes.

[Illustration: FLICKER

_1. Male. 2. Females_]

But besides being a vocalist,--we can hardly call him a singer,--the
flicker is a player upon instruments. He is a great drummer; and if
any one imagines that woodpeckers do not enjoy the sound of their
own music, he should watch a flicker drumming with his long bill on
a battered tin pan in the middle of a pasture. Morning after morning
I have seen one thus engaged, drumming lustily, and then cocking his
head to listen for an answer; and Paderewski at his daily practice upon
the piano could not have looked more in earnest. At other times the
flicker contents himself with a piece of resonant loose bark or a dry
limb.

One proof that this drumming--which is indulged in by woodpeckers
generally--is a true musical performance, and not a mere drilling for
grubs, is the fact that we never hear it in winter. It begins as the
weather grows mild, and is as much a sign of spring as the peeping of
the little tree-frogs--hylas--in the meadow.

The flicker’s nest, as I have said, is built in a hole in a tree, often
an apple-tree. Very noisy in his natural disposition, he keeps a wise
silence while near the spot where his mate is sitting, and will rear
a brood under the orchard-owner’s nose without betraying himself. The
young birds are fed from the parent’s crop, as young pigeons and young
hummingbirds are. The old bird thrusts its bill down the throat of
the nestling and gives it a meal of partially digested food by what
scientific people call a process of regurgitation. Farmers’ boys, who
have watched pigeons feeding their squabs, will know precisely what is
meant.




XVII

THE BITTERN


It was a great day for me when I first heard the so-called booming of
the bittern. For more than ten years I had devoted the principal part
of my spare hours to the study of birds, but though I had taken many
an evening walk near the most promising meadows in my neighborhood, I
could never hear those mysterious pumping or stake-driving noises of
which I had read with so much interest, especially in the writings of
Thoreau.

The truth was, as I have since assured myself, that this representative
of the heron family was not a resident within the limits of my everyday
rambles, none of the meadows thereabout being extensive and secluded
enough to suit his whim.

There came a day, however, when with a friend I made an afternoon
excursion to Wayland, Massachusetts, on purpose to form the
stake-driver’s acquaintance. We walked up the railway track across
the river toward Sudbury, and were hardly seated on the edge of the
meadow, facing the beautiful Nobscot Hill, before my comrade said,
“Hark! There he is!”

Yes, that certainly was the very sound--an old-fashioned wooden pump at
work in the meadow.

We listened intently for perhaps half a dozen times; then I proposed
going further up the track to get the notes at shorter range, and
possibly--who could tell what unheard-of thing might happen?--to obtain
a sight of the bird. We advanced cautiously, though as we were on the
track, six feet or more above the level of the meadow, there was no
chance of concealment, and the bittern went on with his performance.

Meanwhile we maintained a sharp lookout, and presently I descried
a narrow brown object standing upright amidst the grass--a stick,
perhaps. I lifted my opera-glass and spoke quickly to my friend: “I see
him!”

“Where?” he asked; and when I lowered my glass and gave him the bird’s
bearings as related to the remains of an old hayrick not far off, he
said, “Why, I saw that, but took it for a stick.”

“Yes, but see the eye,” I answered.

Within half a minute the bird suddenly threw his head forward and
commenced pumping. This was good luck indeed,--that I should surprise
my very first bittern in his famous act, a thing which better men than
I, after years of familiarity with the bird, had never once succeeded
in accomplishing. Who says that Fortune does not sometimes favor the
fresh hand?

The fellow repeated the operation three times, and between whiles moved
stealthily through the grass toward the leavings of the haycock before
mentioned.

When he reached the hay, we held our breath. Would he actually mount
it? Yes, that was undoubtedly his intention; but he meant to do it in
such a way that no mortal eye should see him. All the time glancing
furtively to left and right, as if the grass were full of enemies, he
put one foot before the other with almost inconceivable slowness,--as
the hour hand turns on the clock’s face. It was an admirable display
of an art which this race of frog, mouse, and insect catchers has
cultivated for untold generations--an art on which its livelihood
depends, the art of invisible motion.

There was no resisting the ludicrousness of his manner. He was in full
view, but so long as he kept still he seemed to think himself quite
safe from detection. Like the hand of the clock, however, if he was
slow he was sure, and in time he was fairly out of the grass, standing
in plain sight upon his hay platform.

Once in position he fell to pumping in earnest, and kept it up for more
than an hour, while two enthusiasts sat upon the railway embankment,
twelve or thirteen rods distant, with opera-glasses and note-books,
scrutinizing his every motion, and felicitating themselves again and
again on seeing thus plainly what so few had ever seen at all. What
would Thoreau have given for such an opportunity?

“The stake-driver is at it in his favorite meadow,” he writes in
his journal, in 1852. “I followed the sound, and at last got within
two rods, it seeming always to recede, and drawing you, like a
will-o’-the-wisp, farther away into the meadows. When thus near, I
heard some lower sounds at the beginning like striking on a stump or a
stake, a dry, hard sound, and then followed the gurgling, pumping notes
fit to come from a meadow.

“This was just within the blueberry and other bushes, and when the bird
flew up, alarmed, I went to the place, but could see no water, which
makes me doubt if water is necessary to it in making the sound. Perhaps
it thrusts its bill so deep as to reach water where it is dry on the
surface.”

This notion that water is employed in the production of the bittern’s
notes has been generally entertained. The notes themselves are of a
character to suggest such an hypothesis, and at least one witness has
borne circumstantial testimony to its truth. In Thoreau’s essay on the
“Natural History of Massachusetts,” he says:--

“On one occasion, the bird has been seen by one of my neighbors to
thrust its bill into the water, and suck up as much as it could hold;
then, raising its head, it pumped it out again with four or five heaves
of the neck, throwing it two or three feet, and making the sound each
time.”

Similar statements have been made as to the corresponding notes of
the European bittern. None of our systematic writers upon American
ornithology have ever witnessed the performance, as far as appears, and
being too honest to draw upon their imaginations, they have left the
matter a mystery. Now, on this auspicious May afternoon, if we learned
nothing else, we could at all events make quite sure whether or not the
bittern did really spout water from his beak.

My readers will have guessed already that our bird, at least, did
nothing of the sort. His bill was never within reach of water. The
operation is a queer one, hard to describe.

The bittern has been standing motionless, perhaps in the humpbacked
attitude in which the artists, following Audubon’s plate, have commonly
represented him; or quite as likely, he has been making a stick or a
soldier of himself, standing bolt upright at full stretch, his long
neck and bill pointed straight at the zenith.

Suddenly he lowers his head, and instantly raises it again and throws
it forward with a quick, convulsive jerk. This movement is attended
by an opening and shutting of the bill, which in turn is accompanied
by a sound which has been well compared to a violent hiccough. The
hiccough--with which, I think, the click of the big mandibles may
sometimes be heard--is repeated a few times, each time a little louder
than before; and then succeed the real pumping or stake-driving noises.

These are in sets of three syllables each, of which the first syllable
is the longest, and somewhat separated from the others. The accent is
strongly upon the middle syllable, and the whole, as oftenest heard, is
an exact reproduction of the sound of a wooden pump, as I have already
said, the voice having that peculiar hollow quality which is produced,
not by the flow of the water, but by the suction of the air in the tube
when the pump begins to work.

But the looker-on is likely to be quite as much impressed by what he
sees as by what he hears. During the whole performance, but especially
during the latter part of it, the bird is engaged in the most violent
contortions, suggestive of nothing but a patient suffering from
uncontrollable nausea. Moreover, as soon as the preliminary hiccoughs
begin, the lower throat or breast is seen to be swelling; the
dilatation grows larger and larger till the pumping is well under way,
and so far as my companion and I could detect, does not subside in the
least until the noises have ceased altogether.

How are the unique, outlandish notes produced? I cannot profess to
know. Our opinion was that the bird swallowed air into his gullet,
gulping it down with each snap of the beak. To all appearance it was
necessary for him to inflate the crop in this way before he could pump,
or boom. As to how much of the grand booming was connected with the
swallowing of the air, and how much, if any, with the expulsion of it,
my friend and I did not agree, and of course neither of us could do
more than guess.

I made some experiments afterwards, by way of imitating the noises;
and these experiments, together with the fact that the grand booming
seemed to be really nothing more than a development of the preliminary
hiccoughs, and the further fact that the swelling of the breast did not
go down gradually during the course of the performance, but suddenly at
the close,--all these incline me to believe that the notes are mainly
if not entirely caused by the inhalation or swallowing of the air; and
I am somewhat strengthened in this opinion by perceiving that when
a man takes air into his stomach the act is attended by a sound not
altogether unlike the bittern’s note in quality, while the expulsion of
it gives rise to noises of an entirely dissimilar character.

That the sounds in question were not made entirely by any ordinary
action of the vocal organs was the decided opinion of both my friend
and myself.

As I have said, we watched the performance for more than an hour. We
were sitting squarely upon the track, and once were compelled to get
up to let a train pass; but the bittern evidently paid no attention to
matters on the railway, being well used to thunder in that direction,
and stood his ground without wincing.

When he had pumped long enough,--and the operation surely looked like
pretty hard work,--he suddenly took wing and flew a little distance
down the meadow. The moment he dropped into the grass he pumped, and
on making another flight he again pumped immediately upon coming to
the ground. This trick, which surprised me not a little in view of
the severe exertion required, is perhaps akin to the habit of smaller
birds, who in seasons of excitement will very often break into song at
the moment of striking a perch.

As we came down the track on our way back to the station, three
bitterns were in the air at once, while a fourth was booming on the
opposite side of the road. One of the flying birds persistently dangled
his legs instead of drawing them up in the usual fashion and letting
the feet stick out behind, parallel with the tail. Probably he was
“showing off,” as is the custom of many birds during the season of
mating.

Our bird across the road, by the bye, was not pumping, but driving a
stake. The middle syllable was truly a mighty whack with a mallet on
the head of a post, so that I could easily enough credit Mr. Samuels’s
statement that he once followed the sound for half a mile, expecting to
find a farmer setting a fence.

In the midst of the hurly-burly we saw a boy coming toward us on the
track.

“Let’s ask him about it,” said my companion.

So, with an air of inquisitive ignorance, he stopped the fellow, and
inquired, “Do you know what it is we hear making that curious noise off
there in the meadow?”

The boy evidently took us for a pair of ignoramuses from the city.

“I guess it’s a frog,” he answered. But when the sounds were repeated
he shook his head and confessed honestly that he didn’t know what made
them.

It was too bad, I thought, that he did not stick to his frog theory.
It would have made so much better a story! He appeared to feel no
curiosity about the matter, and we allowed him to pass on unenlightened.

Not all Wayland people are thus poorly informed, however, and we
shortly learned, to our considerable satisfaction, that they have a
most felicitous local name for the bird. They call him “plum-pudd’n’,”
which is exactly what he himself says, only that his _u_ is in both
words somewhat long, like the vowel in “full.” To get the true effect
of the words they should be spoken with the lips nearly closed, and in
a deep voice.

A few days after this excursion I found a bittern in a large wet meadow
somewhat nearer home. At the nearest he was a long way off, and as I
went farther and farther away from him, I remarked the very unexpected
fact that the last syllable to be lost was not the second, which bears
so sharp an accent, but the long first syllable. It seemed contrary to
reason, but such was unquestionably the truth, and later experiments
confirmed it.

This was in the spring of 1888. In May of the next year, if all went
well, we would see the show again. So we said to each other; but a
veteran ornithologist remarked that we should probably be a good many
years older before we had another such piece of good fortune.

It is a fact familiar to all naturalists, however, that when you have
once found a new plant, or a new bird, or a new nest, the experience is
likely to be soon repeated. You may have spent a dozen years in a vain
search, but now, for some reason, the difficult has all at once become
easy, and almost before you can believe your eyes the rarity has grown
to be a drug in the market. Something like this proved to be true of
the bittern’s boom.

On the afternoon of the 2d of May, 1889, I went to one of my favorite
resorts, a large cat-tail swamp surrounded by woods. My particular
errand was to see whether the least bittern had arrived,--a much
smaller, and in this part of the country, at least, a much less common
bird than his relative of whose vocal accomplishments I am here
treating.

I threw myself down upon the cliff overhanging the edge of the swamp,
to listen for the desired _coo-coo-coo-coo_, and had barely made myself
comfortable when I heard the _plum-pudd’n’_ of the bittern himself,
proceeding, as it seemed, from the reeds directly at my feet. Further
listening satisfied me that the fellow was not far from the end of a
rocky peninsula which juts into the swamp just at this point.

I slipped down the cliff as quietly as possible, picked my way across
the narrow neck leading to the main peninsula, and by keeping behind
rocks and trees managed to reach the very tip without disturbing
the bird. Here I posted myself among the thick trees, and awaited
a repetition of the boom. It was not long in coming, and plainly
proceeded from a bunch of flags just across a little stretch of clear
water.

I looked and looked, while the bittern continued to pump at rather
protracted intervals; but I could see nothing whatever, till presto!
there the creature stood in plain sight.

Whether he had moved into view, or had all the time been visible, I
cannot tell. He soon pumped again, and then again, for perhaps six
times. Then he stalked away out of sight, and I heard nothing more. He
was much nearer than last year’s bird had been, but was still a pumper,
not a stake-driver, and his action was in all respects the same as I
had before witnessed.

There had been no bittern in this swamp the season previous, nor did
any breed here this summer. I visited the place too often for him to
have escaped my notice, had he been present. This bird, then, was a
migrant, and his booming was of interest as showing that the bittern,
like the song-birds, does not wait to get into summer quarters before
beginning to rehearse his love music.

Two days after this my companion of the year before went with me again
to Wayland, and, not to prolong a long story, we sat again upon the
railway and watched a bittern pump for more than an hour. This time, to
be sure, he was partially concealed by the grass, besides being farther
away than we could have wished.

It was curious, and illustrated strikingly the utility of the bird’s
habit of standing motionless, that my friend, who is certainly as
sharp-eyed an observer as I have ever known, was once more completely
taken in. As luck would have it, I caught sight of the bird first, and
when I pointed him out to the other man he replied, “Why, of course I
saw that, but it never occurred to me but that it was a stake.”

We returned from this excursion fairly well convinced that in the early
part of the season, while the grass is still short, one may hope to
see a bittern pump almost any day, if he will go to a suitable meadow
which has a railroad running through it. The track answers a double
purpose: it gives the observer an outlook, such as cannot be obtained
from a boat, and furthermore, the birds are quite unsuspicious of
things on the track, while the presence of a man in the grass or on the
river would almost inevitably attract their attention.




XVIII

BIRDS FOR EVERYBODY


Some birds belong exclusively to specialists. They are so rare, or
their manner of life is so seclusive, that people in general can never
be expected to know them except from books. The latest list of the
birds of Massachusetts includes about three hundred and fifty species
and sub-species. Of these, seventy-five or more are so foreign to this
part of the country as to have appeared here only by accident, while
many others are so excessively rare that no individual observer can
count upon seeing them, however close a lookout he may keep. Other
species are present in goodly numbers, but only in certain portions of
the State; and still others, though generally distributed and fairly
numerous, live habitually in almost impenetrable swamps or in deep
forests, and of necessity are seen only by those who make it their
business to look for them.

It is something for which busy men and women may well be thankful,
therefore, that so many of the most pleasing, or otherwise
interesting, of all our birds are among those which may be called
birds for everybody. Such are the robin, the bluebird, the Baltimore
oriole,--or golden robin,--the blue jay, the crow, and the chickadee.
Of all these we may say that they are common; they come in every one’s
way, and, what is still more to the point, they cannot be mistaken for
anything else. Others are equally common, and are easily enough seen,
but their identity is not so much a matter of course.

The song sparrow, for example, is abundant in Massachusetts from the
middle of March to the end of October. Outside of the forest it is
almost ubiquitous; it sings beautifully and with the utmost freedom; it
ought, one would say, to be universally known. But it is _a_ sparrow,
not _the_ sparrow. In other words, it is only one of many, and so,
common as it is, and freely as it sings (it is to be heard in every
garden and by every roadside in the latter half of March, when few
other birds are in tune), it passes unrecognized by the generality
of people. They read in books of song sparrows, chipping sparrows,
field sparrows, tree sparrows, swamp sparrows, vesper sparrows,
white-throated sparrows, fox sparrows, yellow-winged sparrows, savanna
sparrows, and the like, and when they see any little mottled brown
bird, they say, “Oh, it’s a sparrow,” and seek to know nothing more.

The family of warblers--among the loveliest of all birds--are in
a still worse case, and much the same may be said of swallows and
blackbirds, thrushes and vireos. The number of species and their
perplexing similarity, which are such an attraction to the student,
prove an effectual bar to those who have time and money for newspapers
and novels, but can spare neither for a manual of local ornithology.

I have named six birds which every one knows, or may know, but of
course I do not mean that these are all. Why should not everybody
know the goldfinch--a small, stout-billed, bright yellow, canary-like
bird, with black wings and tail and a black cap? And the flicker--or
golden-winged woodpecker--a little larger than the robin, with
gold-lined wings, a black crescent on the breast, a red patch on the
back of the head, and a white rump, conspicuous as the bird takes
wing? The hummingbird, too--our only one; I should say that everybody
ought to recognize it, only that I have found some who confuse it with
sphinx moths, and will hardly believe me when I tell them of their
mistake. The cedar-bird, likewise, known also as the cherry-bird and
the waxwing, is a bird by itself; remarkably trim and sleek, its upper
parts of a peculiarly warm cinnamon brown, its lower parts yellowish,
its tail tipped handsomely with yellow, its head marked with black and
adorned with a truly magnificent topknot; as great a lover of cherries
as any schoolboy, and one of the first birds upon which the youthful
taxidermist tries his hand. Just now--in early March--the waxwings are
hereabout in great flocks (I saw more than a hundred, surely, three
days ago), stuffing themselves, literally, with savin berries. These
large flocks will after a while disappear, and some time later, in May,
smaller companies will arrive from the South and settle with us for the
summer, helping themselves to our cherries in return for the swarms of
insects of whose presence they have relieved us. If we see them thus
engaged, we shall do well to remember the Scripture text, “The laborer
is worthy of his hire.”

This enumeration of birds, so strongly marked that even a wayfaring man
may easily name them, might be extended indefinitely. It would be a
strange Massachusetts boy who did not know the ruffed grouse (though he
would probably call him the partridge) and the Bob White; the kingbird,
with his black and white plumage, his aerial tumblings, and his
dashing pursuit of the crow; the splendid scarlet tanager, fiery red,
with black tail and wings; the bobolink; the red-winged blackbird,
whose watery _conkaree_ is so welcome a sound about the meadows in
March; the slate-colored snowbird; the indigo-bird, small, deep blue
throughout, and with a thick bill; the butcher-bird, a constant though
not numerous winter visitor, sometimes flying against windows in which
canaries are hung, as one did at our house only this winter--these
surely may be known by any who will take even slight pains to form
their acquaintance. And, beside these, there are two birds whom
everybody _does_ know, but whom I forgot to include with the six
first mentioned,--the catbird and the brown thrasher, two overgrown,
long-tailed wrens, near relatives of the mockingbird, both of them
great singers in their way, and one of them--the catbird--decidedly
familiar and a fairly good mimic.




XIX

WINTER PENSIONERS


Our northern winter is a lean time, ornithologically, though it brings
us some choice birds of its own, and is not without many alleviations.
When the redpolls come in crowds and the white-winged crossbills in
good numbers, both of which things happened last year, the world is not
half so bad with us as it might be. Still, winter is winter, a season
to be tided over rather than doted upon, and anything which helps to
make the time pass agreeably is matter for thankfulness. So I am asked
to write something about the habit we are in at our house of feeding
birds in cold weather, and thus keeping them under the windows. Really
we have done nothing peculiar, nor has our success been beyond that of
many of our neighbors; but such as it is, the work has given us much
enjoyment, and the readers of “Bird-Lore”[1] are welcome to the story.

Our method is to put out pieces of raw suet, mostly the trimmings of
beefsteak. These we attach to branches of trees and to the veranda
trellis, taking pains, of course, to have them beyond the cat’s reach
(that the birds may feed safely), and at the same time well disposed
for our own convenience as spectators. For myself, in addition, I
generally nail pieces of the bait upon one or two of the outer sills of
my study windows. I like, as I sit reading or writing, to hear now and
then a nuthatch or a chickadee hammering just outside the pane. Often
I rise to have a look at the visitor. There is nothing but the glass
between us, and I can stand near enough to see his beady eyes, and, so
to speak, the expression of his face. Sometimes two birds are there at
once, one waiting for the other. Sometimes they have a bit of a set-to.
Then, certainly, they are not without facial expression.

Once in a while, in severe weather, I have sprinkled crumbs (sweet or
fatty crumbs are best--say bits of doughnut) on the inside ledge, and
then, with the window raised a few inches, have awaited callers. If the
weather is bad enough they are not long in coming. A chickadee alights
on the outer sill, notices the open window, scolds a little (the thing
looks like a trap--at all events it is something new, and birds are
conservative), catches sight of the crumbs (well, now, that’s another
story), ceases his _dee, dee, dee_, and the next minute hops inside.

[Illustration: A DOWNY WOODPECKER]

[Illustration: A BRANCH ESTABLISHMENT]

The crumbs prove to be appetizing, and by the time he has swallowed a
few of them he seems to forget how he came in, and instead of backing
out, as a reasonable being like a chickadee might be expected to do, he
flies to another light of the bay window. Then, lest he should injure
himself, I must get up and catch him and show him to the door. By the
time I have done this two or three times within half an hour, I begin
to find it an interruption to other work, and put down the window.
White-breasted nuthatches and downies come often to the outer sill, but
only the chickadees ever venture inside.

These three are our daily pensioners. If they are all in the tree
together, as they very often are, they take precedence at the larder
according to their size. No nuthatch presumes to hurry a woodpecker,
and no chickadee ever thinks of disturbing a nuthatch. He may fret
audibly, calling the other fellow greedy, for aught I know, and asking
him if he wants the earth; but he maintains a respectful distance.
Birds, like wild things in general, have a natural reverence for size
and weight.

The chickadees are much the most numerous with us, but taking the year
together, the woodpeckers are the most constant. My notes record them
as present in the middle of October, 1899, and now, in the middle of
October, 1900, they are still in daily attendance. Perhaps there were a
few weeks of midsummer when they stayed away, but I think not. One pair
built a nest somewhere in the neighborhood and depended on us largely
for supplies, much to their convenience and our pleasure. As soon as
the red-capped young ones were able to fly, the parents brought them
to the tree and fed them with the suet (it was a wonder how much of it
they could eat), till they were old enough to help themselves. And they
act, old and young alike, as if they owned the place. If a grocer’s
wagon happens to stop under the tree they wax indignant, and remain so
till it drives away. Even the black cat, Satan, has come to acknowledge
their rights in the case, and no longer so much as thinks of them as
possible game.

I have spoken, I see, as if these three species were all; but, not to
mention the blue jays, whose continual visits are rather ineffectively
frowned upon (they carry off too much at once), we had last winter,
for all the latter half of it, a pair of red-bellied nuthatches. They
dined with us daily (pretty creatures they are), and stayed so late
in the spring that I began to hope the handy food-supply would induce
them to tarry for the summer. They were mates, I think. At any rate,
they preferred to eat from the same bit of fat, one on each side, in
great contrast with all the rest of our company. Frequently, too, a
brown creeper would be seen hitching up the trunk or over the larger
limbs. He likes pleasant society, though he has little to say, and
perhaps found scraps of suet in the crevices of the bark, where the
chickadees, who are given to this kind of providence, may have packed
it in store. Somewhat less frequently a goldcrest would come with the
others, fluttering amid the branches like a sprite. One bird draws
another, especially in hard times. And so it happened that our tree,
or rather trees,--an elm and a maple,--were something like an aviary
the whole winter through. It was worth more than all the trouble which
the experiment cost us to lie in bed before sunrise, with the mercury
below zero, and hear a chickadee just outside singing as sweetly as any
thrush could sing in June. If he had been trying to thank us, he could
not have done it more gracefully.

The worse the weather, the better we enjoyed the birds’ society; and
the better, in general, they seemed to appreciate our efforts on their
behalf. It was noticeable, however, that chickadees were with us
comparatively little during high, cold winds. On the 18th of February,
for example, we had a blizzard, with driving snow, the most inclement
day of the winter. At seven o’clock, when I looked out, four downy
woodpeckers were in the elm, all trying their best to eat, though the
branches shook till it was hard work to hold on. They stayed much of
the forenoon. At ten o’clock, when the storm showed signs of abating,
though it was still wild enough, a chickadee made his appearance and
whistled _Phœbe_ again and again--“a long time,” my note says--in his
cheeriest manner. Who can help loving a bird so courageous, “so frolic,
stout, and self-possest”? Emerson did well to call him a “scrap of
valor.” Yet I find from a later note that “there were nothing like
the usual number of chickadees so long as the fury lasted.” Doubtless
most of them stayed among the evergreens. It is an old saying of the
chickadee’s, frequently quoted, “Be bold, be bold, but not too bold.”
On the same day I saw a member of the household snowballing an English
sparrow away from one branch, while a downy woodpecker continued to
feed upon the next one. The woodpecker had got the right idea of
things. Honest folk need not fear the constable.




XX

WATCHING THE PROCESSION


It begins to go by my door about the first of March, and is three full
months in passing. The participants are all in uniform, each after
his kind, some in the brightest of colors, some in Quakerish grays
and browns. They seem not to stand very strictly upon the order of
their coming; red-coats and blue-coats travel side by side. Like the
flowers, they have a calendar of their own, and in their own way are
punctual, but their movements are not to be predicted with anything
like mathematical nicety. Of some companies of them I am never certain
which will precede the other, just as I can never tell whether, in a
particular season, the anemone or the five-finger will come first into
bloom. They need no bands of music, no drum-corps nor fifers. The whole
procession, indeed, is itself a band of music, a grand army of singers
and players on instruments. They sing many tunes; each uniform has a
tune of its own, but, unlike what happens in military and masonic
parades, there is never any jangling, no matter how near together the
different bands may be marching.

As I said, the pageant lasts for three months. It is fortunate for
me, perhaps, that it lasts no longer; for the truth is, I have grown
so fond of watching it that I find it hard to attend to my daily work
so long as the show continues. If I go inside for half a day, to read
or to write, I am all the time thinking of what is going on outside.
Who knows what I may be missing at this very minute? I keep by me a
prospectus of the festival, a list of all who are expected to take part
in it, and, like most watchers of such parades, I have my personal
favorites for whom I am always on the lookout. One thing troubles me:
there is never a year that I do not miss a good many (a _bad_ many, I
feel like saying) of those whose names appear in the announcements.
Some of them, indeed, I have _never_ seen. If they are really in the
ranks, it must be that their numbers are very small; for the printed
programme tells exactly how they will be dressed, and I am sure I
should recognize them if they came within sight. Some of them, I fancy,
do not keep their engagements.

I spoke, to begin with, of their passing my door. But I spoke
figuratively. Some, it is true, do pass my door, and even tarry for a
day or two under my windows, but to see others I have to go into the
woods. Some I find only in deep, almost impenetrable swamps, dodging in
and out among thick bushes and cat-tails. A good many follow the coast.
I watch them running along the sea-beach on the edge of the surf, or
walking sedately over muddy flats where I need rubber boots in which to
follow them. Some are silent during the day, but as darkness comes on
indulge in music and queer aerial dancing.

Many travel altogether by night, resting and feeding in the daytime.
It is pleasant to stand out of doors in the evening, and hear them
calling to each other overhead as they hasten northward; for at this
time of the year, I have forgotten to say, they are always traveling in
a northerly direction.

The procession, as such, has no definite terminus. It breaks up
gradually by the dropping out of its members here and there. Each of
them knows pretty well where he is going. This one, who came perhaps
from Cuba, means to stop in Massachusetts; that one, after a winter
in Central America, has in view a certain swamp or meadow, or, it may
be, some mountain-top, in New Hampshire; another will not be at home
till he reaches the furthermost coast of Labrador or the banks of
the Saskatchewan. The prospectus of which I spoke, and of which every
reader ought to have a copy, tells, in a general way, whither each
company is bound, but the members of the same company often scatter
themselves over several degrees of latitude.

Some of the companies move compactly, and are only two or three days,
more or less, in passing a given point. You must be in the woods, for
example, on the 12th or 13th of May, or you will miss them altogether.
Others straggle along for a whole month. You begin to think, perhaps,
that they mean to stay with you all summer, but some morning you wake
up to the fact that the last one has gone.

It is curious how few people see this army of travelers. They pass by
thousands and hundreds of thousands. More than a hundred different
companies go through every town in Massachusetts between March 1 and
June 1. They dress gayly--not a few of them seem to have borrowed
Joseph’s coat--and are full of music, yet somehow their advent excites
little remark. Perhaps it is because, for the most part, they flit
from bush to bush and from tree to tree, here one and there one. If
some year they should form in line, and move in close order along the
public streets, what a stir they would excite! For a day or two the
newspapers would be full of the sensation, and possibly the baseball
reporters would be compelled for once to shorten their accounts of
Battum’s “wonderful left-hand catch” and Ketchum’s “phenomenal slide to
the second base.” It is just as well, I dare say, that nothing of this
kind should ever happen, for it is hard to see how the great reading
public could bear even the temporary loss of such interesting and
instructive narratives.

Meantime, though the greater part of the people pay no heed to these
“birds of passage,” some of us are never tired of watching them. I
myself used to be fond of gazing at military and political parades.
In my time I have seen a good many real soldiers and a good many
make-believes. But as age comes on, I find myself, rightly or wrongly,
caring less and less for such spectacles. It will never be so, I think,
with the procession of which I am now writing. I have never watched it
with more enthusiasm than this very year. It is only just over, but
I am already beginning to count upon its autumnal return, and by the
middle of August shall be looking every day for its advance couriers.

Till then I shall please myself with observing the ways of such of the
host as have happened to drop out of the procession in my immediate
neighborhood. One of them I can hear singing at this very moment. He
and his wife spent the winter in Mexico, as well as I can determine,
and have been back with us since the 11th of May. They have pitched
their tent for the summer in the top of a tall elm directly in front
of my door, and just now are much occupied with household cares. The
little husband (_Vireo gilvus_ he is called in the official programme,
but I have heard him spoken of, not inappropriately, as the warbling
vireo) takes upon himself his full share of the family drudgery, and it
is very pretty indeed to see him sitting in the tent and singing at his
work. He sets us all, as I think, an excellent example.




XXI

SOUTHWARD BOUND


While walking through a piece of pine wood, three or four days ago, I
was delighted to put my eye unexpectedly upon a hummingbird’s nest. The
fairy structure was placed squarely upon the upper surface of a naked,
horizontal branch, and looked so fresh, trimmed outwardly with bits
of gray lichen, that I felt sure it must have been built this year.
But where now were the birds that built it, and the nestlings that
were hatched in it? Who could tell? In imagination I saw the mother
sitting upon the tiny, snow-white eggs, and then upon the two little
ones--little ones, indeed, no bigger than bumble-bees at first. I saw
her feeding them day by day, as they grew larger and larger, till at
last the cradle was getting too narrow for them, and they were ready
to make a trial of their wings. But where were they now? Not here,
certainly. For a fortnight I had been passing down this path almost
daily, and not once had I seen a hummingbird.

No, they are not here, and even as I write I seem to see the little
family on their way to the far south. They are making the journey by
easy stages, I hope--flitting from flower-bed to flower-bed, now in
Connecticut, now in New Jersey, and so on through Pennsylvania and the
Southern States. Will they cross the water to the West Indies, as some
of their kind are said to do? or, less adventurous, will they keep
straight on to some mountain-side in Costa Rica, or even in Brazil? I
should be sorry to believe that the parent birds took their departure
first, leaving the twin children to find their way after them as best
they could--as those who have paid most attention to such matters
assure us that many of our birds are in the habit of doing. But however
they go, and wherever they end their long journey, may wind and weather
be favorable, and old and young alike return, after the winter is over,
to build other nests here in their native New England.

This passing of birds back and forth, a grand semi-annual tide, is to
me a thing of wonder. I think of the millions of sandpipers and plovers
which for two months (it is now late in September) have been pouring
southward along the sea-coast. Some of them passed here on their way
north no longer ago than the last days of May. They went far up toward
the Arctic circle, but before the end of July they were back again,
hastening to the equator. The golden plover, we are told, travels from
Greenland to Patagonia.

All summer the golden warblers were singing within sound of my windows.
As I walked I saw them flitting in and out of the roadside bushes,
beautiful and delicate creatures. But before the first of September the
last of them disappeared. I did not see them depart. They took wing in
the night, and almost before I suspected it they were gone. They will
winter in Central or South America, and, within a week of May-day, we
shall have them here again, as much at home as if they had never left
us.

They were gone before the first of September, I said. But I was
thinking of those which had summered in Massachusetts. In point of
fact, I saw a golden warbler only ten days ago. He was with a mixed
flock of travelers, and, in all likelihood, had come from the extreme
north; for this dainty, blue-eyed warbler is common in summer, not
only throughout the greater part of the United States, but on the
very shores of the Arctic Ocean. So he voyages back and forth, living
his life from land to land, as Tennyson says, led by who knows what
impulse?

  “Sweet bird, thy bower is ever green,
    Thy sky is ever clear;
  Thou hast no sorrow in thy song,
    No winter in thy year.”

It is worth giving a little time daily to what is called ornithology to
be able to greet such wanderers as they come and go. For some days now
a few Western palm warblers have been paying us a visit, and, though
the town has never commissioned me to that office, I have taken it upon
myself to do them the honors. They have met me halfway, at least, as
the everyday expression is; yielding readily to my enticements, and
more than once coming near enough to show me their white lower eyelids,
so that I might be quite sure of their identity. A little later the
_Eastern_ palm warbler will be due, and I hope to find him equally
complaisant; for I wish to see his lower eyelid, also, which is yellow
instead of white.

At this time of the year, indeed, there is no lack of such interesting
and well-dressed strangers, no matter where we may go. The woods are
alive with them by day, and the air by night. There are few evenings
when you may not hear them calling overhead as they hasten southward.
Men who have watched them through telescopes, pointed at the full moon,
have calculated their height at one or two miles. One observer saw
more than two hundred cross the moon’s disk in two hours. The greater
part passed so swiftly as to make it impossible to say more than
that they were birds; but others, flying at a greater altitude, and
therefore traversing the field of vision less rapidly, were identified
as blackbirds, rails, snipe, and ducks. Another observer plainly
recognized swallows, warblers, goldfinches, and woodpeckers.

All over the northern hemisphere to-night, in America, Europe, and
Asia, countless multitudes of these wayfarers will be coursing the
regions of the upper air; and to-morrow, if we go out with our eyes
open, we shall find, here and there, busy little flocks of stragglers
that have stopped by the way to rest and feed: sparrows, snowbirds,
kinglets, nuthatches, chickadees, thrushes, warblers, wrens, and what
not, a few of them singing, and every one of them evidently in love
with life, and full of happy expectations.




INDEX


  Bittern:--
    American, 68.
    least, 78.

  Blackbird, red-winged, 86.

  Bluebird, 44, 59, 83.

  Bob White, 85.

  Bobolink, 86.

  Butcher-bird, 19, 86.


  Catbird, 86.

  Cedar-bird, 84.

  Chickadee, 7, 12, 83, 88, 91, 92.

  Chimney swift, 56, 63.

  Creeper, brown, 10, 91.

  Crossbill, white-winged, 87.

  Crow, 44, 49, 83.


  Flicker, 64, 84.


  Goldfinch, 84.

  Grosbeak:--
    cardinal, 25.
    rose-breasted, 36, 40.

  Grouse, 85.


  Hummingbird, ruby-throated, 51, 63, 84, 99.


  Indigo-bird, 86.


  Jay, blue, 43, 83, 90.


  Kingbird, 47, 85.

  Kinglet:--
    golden-crowned, 1, 91.
    ruby-crowned, 1.


  Migration, 93, 99.

  Mockingbird, 16.


  Nighthawk, 60.

  Nuthatch:--
    red-breasted, 90.
    white-breasted, 88, 89.


  Oriole, Baltimore, 83.


  Partridge, 85.

  Plover, golden, 101.

  Plovers, 100.

  Purple finch, 36, 37.


  Redpoll linnet, 37.

  Robin, 83.


  Sandpipers, 100.

  Shrike:--
    great northern, 19, 86.
    loggerhead, 21.

  Snipe, 61.

  Snowbird (junco), 36, 59, 86.

  Sparrow:--
    chipping, 30, 31.
    English, 30, 92.
    field, 30, 32, 36, 37.
    fox, 36, 37.
    Ipswich, 38.
    savanna, 26, 38.
    song, 26, 36, 37, 39, 83.
    tree, 36, 37, 38.
    vesper, 26, 36, 37, 39.
    white-throated, 36, 37, 38.

  Swift, chimney, 56, 63.


  Tanager:--
    scarlet, 22, 85.
    southern, 25.

  Thrasher, brown, 15, 86.


  Vireo, warbling, 98.

  Vireos, 84.

  Vulture, California, 1, 4.


  Warbler:--
    golden, 101.
    palm, 102.

  Warblers, 84.

  Waxwing, cedar, 84.

  Whip-poor-will, 60.

  Woodcock, 61.

  Woodpecker:--
    downy, 89, 92.
    golden-winged, 64, 84.




  The Riverside Press
  _Electrotyped and printed by H. O. Houghton & Co._
  _Cambridge, Mass., U. S. A._




FOOTNOTE:

  [1] To which this article was originally contributed.




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EVERYDAY BIRDS ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of Gas and flame in modern warfare, by S.
J. M. Auld

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Gas and flame in modern warfare

Author: S. J. M. Auld

Illustrator: W. G. Thayer

Release Date: December 17, 2022 [eBook #69562]

Language: English

Produced by: deaurider, David E. Brown, and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by The
             Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GAS AND FLAME IN MODERN
WARFARE ***





GAS AND FLAME

MAJOR S. J. M. AULD, M.C.


[Illustration: Lieut. W. G. Thayer, of the Gas Defense Division, U. S.
Army, is the artist of the drawing here reproduced which was designed
for the purpose of bringing home the necessity of care in all that
pertains to the use and manufacture of the gas mask.

In order to impress upon the soldier in training the need of care and
speed in adjusting the mask in case of gas attack, the poster was
printed with this wording:

  KEEP YOUR HEAD; HOLD YOUR BREATH,--
  BE QUICK!!
  AND THIS WON’T HAPPEN TO YOU

That the workers engaged in the manufacture of gas masks might realize
the importance of care and flawlessness in their work, the same poster
was placed in the factories with a legend reading:

  THE FINAL INSPECTOR]




  GAS AND FLAME
  IN MODERN WARFARE

  BY
  MAJOR S. J. M. AULD, M.C.
  ROYAL BERKSHIRE REGIMENT
  _Member of the British Military Mission
  to the United States_

  FRONTISPIECE BY
  W. G. THAYER

  [Illustration]

  NEW YORK
  GEORGE H. DORAN COMPANY




  _Copyright, 1918,
  By George H. Doran Company_

  _Copyright, 1918,
  By The Curtis Publishing Company_

  _Copyright, 1918,
  By Doubleday, Page & Company_

  _Printed in the United States of America_




PUBLISHER’S NOTE


Need for the education of vast numbers of men in various branches
of Gas Service and those in camps on the position of Gas Warfare at
the front, has made imperative the publication of this book, as has
also the need of educating the public, owing to the many misleading
newspaper reports, sometimes merely misinformative, sometimes
distinctly mischievous, appearing from time to time.

Major Auld, chemist and teacher before the war, and as he modestly
styled it, “amateur soldier,” volunteered for service at the front as a
“Territorial,” at the very outset of the conflict.

Some months after the first gas attack, he was taken into the Gas
Service, owing to his training and ability as a chemist, and later
became Chief Gas Officer to Sir Julian Byng’s Army. He was awarded
the Military Cross after the Battle of the Somme, and was wounded in
an expedition into No Man’s Land to observe the effect of a British
Gas attack. He has therefore been in touch with gas warfare from the
beginning and knows all phases.

As the natural consequence of all this, the Government of the United
States welcomed him as the representative of Great Britain in its
counsel to America on all aspects of gas warfare. In this official
capacity the Major has been engaged here assisting in organization and
development of training, research and production aspects of Gas, and
lecturing at camps, the War College, and West Point.

The American Gas Service has, for all these reasons, deemed the
publication of Major Auld’s experiences very desirable.




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER I
                                                              PAGE
  The first rumours of German gas attacks--Sceptically
    received--First attack in 1915--Canadian
    pluck under gas--Nernst and Haber the
    inventors of German gas--The difficulties of
    getting practicable gases--The technic of gas
    attacks--A German prisoner’s account                         9

  CHAPTER II

  The first respirators--First-aid devices--The
    smoke helmet--Anti-gas sprayers--Their use
    and delicacy--The English chemists set to
    work--The task of training the whole army                   26

  CHAPTER III

  Popular terror of gas--Necessity for drilling and
    early personal experience--Sure defence from
    gas possible--The first gas alarms--The prussic
    acid scare a myth--The phosgene scare a
    reality--The helmet made to combat it--Necessity
    for renovating the helmet                                   42

  CHAPTER IV

  The attack of Dec. 1915--The Allies’ good training
    tells--The casualties analysed--The new
    element of surprise--Evidences of the use of
    phosgene--The incident of the bulb--Improved
    alarms--The Strombos sirens--Accidents
    to the horns--The Tear Gas Shell--Its
    chemical analysis--Combated by anti-gas
    goggles--Tommies scoff at Tear Gas--The
    Germans make it formidable                                  62

  CHAPTER V

  Summer of 1916 the highwater mark of the German
    gas cloud--Their improved methods--The
    need of speed and secrecy--Gas as a rat
    exterminator--Causes of Allied casualties--Germans
    killed with their own gas--Gas
    masks for horses and mules--Reduced Allied
    casualties--Humorous incidents                              88

  CHAPTER VI

  The last German gas cloud sent over August 1916--Its
    intensity--“Delayed” cases of phosgene
    gassing--Cigarettes as a test of gassing--Dangers
    of carelessness--The sprayer abandoned
    for Mrs. Ayrton’s fan--Responsibilities
    of the divisional gas office--Russian gas victims--The
    day of the gas cloud over                                  112

  CHAPTER VII

  The rising importance of the gas shell--The
    variety of gases practicable with the shell--The
    deadly Green Cross Shell--Risks of
    transporting “duds” for chemical analysis--Reduced
    Allied casualties--German blunders
    in shelling tactics--Importance of universal
    discipline                                                 127

  CHAPTER VIII

  The gas-proof dugout--First-aid methods of
    alarm--Von Buelow improves German gas
    tactics--Popular errors about gas--Effectiveness
    of new British respirators--Vomiting gas--Germans
    speed up their manufacture--Gas
    as a neutraliser of artillery fire--As a neutraliser
    of work behind the trenches--Raw recruits
    ashamed to wear the mask--Casualties
    resulting                                                  145

  CHAPTER IX

  Mustard or Yellow Cross gas--Not deadly but a
    dangerous pest--Its troublesome persistence--Cleaning
    it out by fires--Sneezing of Blue
    Cross gas--Another pest--Its violent effect--The
    limit of gas shell effectiveness--The need
    for constant vigilance and disciplinary training           169

  CHAPTER X

  Liquid fire--First used by Germans in July 1915--A
    great surprise and success--German hopes
    from it--Construction of a flame projector--Flammenwerfer
    companies--Their perilous
    duties and incidents of desertion from them--Improved
    types of projectors--Co-operation
    of machine-gun fire--Failure of liquid fire--Its
    short duration and short range--Ease of
    escape from it                                             185




GAS AND FLAME




GAS AND FLAME

CHAPTER I

  The first rumours of German gas attacks--Sceptically received--First
    attack in 1915--Canadian pluck under gas--Nernst and Haber the
    inventors of German gas--The difficulties of getting practicable
    gases--The technic of gas attacks--A German prisoner’s account.


In the early part of April, 1915, we were in the trenches opposite
Messines. We enjoyed the usual morning and evening “hate”; we sniped
and were sniped at; we patrolled and wired and attempted to drain
away the superfluous water, and there was much mud and humour and
expectancy. It is true there were no Mills grenades or Stokes mortars
or tin hats, but trench warfare was not so very different then from
what it is now--with one great exception: There was no gas. And
there were consequently no respirators to carry day and night. It is
almost impossible now to remember the time when one did not carry a
respirator in the trenches. Somehow it makes you feel quite naked to
think of it--and yet there we were, imagining we knew what war really
was like!

The newspapers we got at that time were generally a good many days old,
and censored at that, and our chief source of news about the war in
other people’s parts of the line was a summary of so-called information
issued from headquarters, which percolated down to the battalion and,
like every other summary before and since, went by the name of “Comic
Cuts.”

Somewhere about the middle of the month we heard that in somebody
else’s summary had appeared a paragraph to the effect that a deserter
from the German lines up in the salient had told a cock-and-bull story
of how they intended to poison us all with a cloud of gas, and that
tanks full of the poison gas were already installed in their trenches.

Of course nobody believed him. The statement was “passed for
information for what it is worth.” And as nobody ever believed anything
that appeared in Comic Cuts in any case, we were not disposed to get
the wind up about it. And then, about a week later, on April 22, 1915,
was launched the first gas attack; and another constant horror was
added to an already somewhat unpleasant war. Details about the attack
are still somewhat meagre, for the simple reason that the men who could
have told much about it never came back.

The place chosen for the first gas attack was in the northeast part of
the Ypres salient at that part of the line where the French and British
lines met, running down from where the trenches left the canal near
Boesinghe. On the French right was the ---- Regiment of Turcos, and on
the British left were the Canadians.

Try to imagine the feelings and the condition of the coloured troops
as they saw the vast cloud of greenish-yellow gas spring out of the
ground and slowly move down wind toward them, the vapour clinging to
the earth, seeking out every hole and hollow and filling the trenches
and shell holes as it came. First wonder, then fear; then, as the first
fringes of the cloud enveloped them and left them choking and agonised
in the fight for breath--panic. Those who could move broke and ran,
trying, generally in vain, to outstrip the cloud which followed
inexorably after them.

The majority of those in the front line were killed--some, let us
hope, immediately, but most of them slowly and horribly. It is not my
intention to try to play upon feelings, but those of us who have seen
men badly gassed can only think with horror of a battlefield covered
with such cases, over which the Germans subsequently advanced.

The Canadians on the British left fared both better and worse than the
French coloured troops. Only their left appears to have been in the
main path of the poison cloud, but there is little doubt that in the
thickest part those who did not escape either to a flank or to the rear
were killed on the field. Thousands of those in the support trenches
and reserve lines and in billets behind the line were suffocated--many
to die later in the field ambulances and casualty clearing stations.

Of those on the fringe of the cloud many saved themselves by burying
their faces in the earth. Others wrapped mufflers round their mouths
and noses or stuffed handkerchiefs into their mouths. Many of these
men were saved by their presence of mind, for though gassed at the time
they recovered later, after treatment in the hospitals.

It is on record that the Canadians, with handkerchiefs or mufflers tied
over their mouths, continued to engage the Germans and that a number
of them actually charged back through the gas cloud in an endeavour to
reach the enemy. What became of them is not known.

In this way a big gap was made in the Allied lines, through which the
Germans advanced. But the Canadians quickly formed a flank on the left
and stoutly engaged the enemy, with such success that they first slowed
up and then brought to a halt the advance of the Germans. It was this
prompt action and gallant resistance that probably saved the day.

Whether the German high command had underestimated the probable effect
of the gas and had arranged for only a limited objective past which
the local commanders did not take the initiative to go, or whether
the latter were unaware of the real weakness of the Canadian line is
unknown. The fact remains that they did not press their advantage to
the full. They had taken the Allied front line on a wide front, killed
or captured thousands of men and taken sixty guns, and seemed to have
a clear way through to Calais; but they were stopped by the pluck of a
handful of Canadians. Reinforcements of men and guns were rushed up,
and the immediate danger was over.

It is a matter for surmise how long the Germans had been planning and
preparing their use of gas. The idea may have been a pre-war one, but
it is difficult to believe that a project deliberately planned for
years would not have been developed so as to make it a sure winner--for
it could easily have been that. If, for example, they had made the
attack over a wider front with such strong gas clouds as are now used
nothing could possibly have stood against them. Every living thing to a
depth of fifteen miles or more could have been killed.

On the other hand it is impossible to imagine the use of poison gas as
having been decided on without better preparation having been made to
meet retaliation, unless it was assumed either that the use of the gas
would be decisive or that at any rate the war would be finished before
the Allies could hit back with the same weapon.

In any case the preparation must have been going on for months. All
the production of material, organisation of personnel and so on takes
a long time. This we realised ourselves later, for though the decision
to retaliate with gas was made in May it was September before an attack
could possibly be made. If we assume that a like interval of four
months elapsed for the perfecting of the German arrangements it means
that the decision to use gas was made about Christmas, 1914.

The onus of urging the Kaiser’s advisers to adopt the use of poisonous
gases had been laid at the door of Professor Nernst, professor of
chemistry at the University of Berlin. Professor Nernst is a noted
chemist, and even before the war was a notorious Pan-German and
Anglophobe--one of the “professors” who carried too much weight in
Germany and whose arrogance and shortsightedness helped to lure
her to her downfall. Some time after the use of gas was started
Professor Nernst was made a count by the Kaiser for his “notable
services”--meaning presumably the use of gas in warfare.

The actual carrying out of the gas operations was intrusted to another
professor of chemistry, this being one Haber, of the Kaiser Wilhelm
Physical Chemical Institute at Berlin. In 1914, long before the war
started, Professor Haber and his assistants are known to have been
working secretly with some intensely poisonous arsenic gases and
liquids, and one of the assistants was killed and another is reported
to have had his arm blown off during the researches.

Haber’s particular job was to make all the scientific arrangements
in the field; to decide on the gases to be used, and the quantity
to employ; to study the wind directions and decide exactly when to
make the attack. In the weeks preceding the twenty-second of April,
Haber was continually at the Front receiving reports from the wind
observation stations and in close touch with the men in charge of the
cylinders in the trenches. On several occasions during this time the
attack was fixed for a certain hour, but was postponed by Haber, owing
to the wind’s being unsuitable.

The actual arrangements that had to be made were much more complex
than the carrying out of the attack itself. First of all, decision had
to be come to as to the gas to be used in the fiendish attempt. Such
a gas had of course to be highly poisonous. Then it must be cheaply
and easily made in large quantities; it had to be compressible, so
that it could be transported easily; it must be heavier than air, so
that it should keep close to the ground when first liberated; and for
preference it should not be unstable--that is, decompose easily and
enter into nonpoisonous combinations with materials, other than man,
that it should come across in its passage through the air.

Any chemist to whom such a problem is put will inform you there are
very few gases that fill the bill. The German choice rested on that
gas well-known to students of chemistry--chlorine. Chlorine in large
quantities was available from the alkali works in Germany, and it
meets all the other requirements except that of not easily combining
with other things. This deficiency was fortunate, for it meant that
protective chemicals were easy to find when it became necessary to
provide respirators to the Allied troops.

Then there was the question of transport and emission. The gas was
eventually put up in steel cylinders, about thirty inches long and
eight inches across and stout enough to stand a pressure of about ten
atmospheres, the gas being stored in them compressed to a liquid. On
opening such a cylinder the liquid boils and gives off the gas again,
but this would not do for field work, because of the intense cold which
is produced by the sudden expansion. This would freeze up the pipes and
slow down the discharge to such an extent that the gas attack would be
too weak.

To get over this difficulty the Germans fitted their cylinders with
internal siphon tubes so that actually liquid chlorine was forced into
the air, where it evaporated without affecting the gas remaining in the
cylinder. By this means the whole of the gas in the cylinder, amounting
to forty-five pounds, is emptied into the atmosphere in less than three
minutes. The sudden expansion of the chlorine in the air also makes
both it and the surrounding air cold and helps to keep the cloud close
to the ground.

The actual handing of the gas attacks was allotted to two regiments of
pioneers--the 35th and 36th Pioneer Regiments, which were specially
organised for this purpose. These regiments have the ordinary
organisation of two battalions per regiment, with three companies and a
park or transport company per battalion. The rank and file are ordinary
pioneers, but the officers are specially picked and include chemists,
mechanical experts, meteorologists, and other men with special
scientific qualifications.

The choice of country in which to make a gas attack was a serious
matter to the enemy. The gas of course will go with the wind, but it
depends largely on what the country is like where the wind will go. The
Germans themselves say they prefer a flat country without any marked
under features and sloping gently toward our lines, just as they had at
Ypres. Indeed, they went the length of saying that a gas attack could
not be carried out in hilly or very broken country; and they suffered
in consequence later on, through being taken unawares by the French in
just such country in the Vosges when retaliation was commenced. But
taking it altogether the Germans were wise in their choice of position.

Another thing that had to be considered was the outline of their own
trench system, so that they would not let off the gas in such parts
of the line that it would float back and gas their own troops in the
neighbouring trenches. To do this they invented a “factor of safety,”
which represented an angle between the direction of the wind and the
line of the trenches. No attack was to be made if the wind direction
came within forty degrees of any trench within gassing distance. This
worked very well.

Another consideration was the strength of the wind. The wind must not
be too strong when the gusts disperse the gas cloud, or it will weaken
it so that it loses a lot of its effect and will be blown over the
enemy too quickly; nor must it be so weak that it will take a long time
to reach the opposing trenches.

Another great danger in winds of too low velocity is that these are
just the winds which change their direction most frequently, and
anything under two miles per hour is just as likely to blow the
gas back to the place from which it came. It was disregarding this
principle on one occasion later on that caused the Germans numerous
casualties from one of their own gas clouds. In general, however, it
may be laid down that the most favourable winds are those between four
and twelve miles an hour, so that with a wind of eight miles an hour
the cloud would move just twice as quickly as a man walking rapidly,
and would take only twelve and a half seconds to cross No Man’s Land in
places where the trenches are fifty yards apart.

Let me try to give an account of the procedure of carrying out gas
attacks as it was told me by a German prisoner taken not so very long
ago. He said:

“I am not one of the gas pioneers, but being an engineer by trade and
having been in the trenches for many weeks with the 35th Regiment
of Pioneers I have got to know their methods fairly well. Indeed I
assisted on one occasion in carrying cylinders into the trenches for
an attack against the British. Gas is not popular with us; we have had
too many mishaps, and the cylinders are a nuisance to carry into the
trenches. They weigh ninety pounds and they are always carried in by
the infantry. A gas regiment does not do that for itself. It is a long
carry and it is really more than a one-man load. At the most two men
are allotted to carry in each cylinder, whatever the distance.

“Several thousand of these cylinders must be taken into the trenches,
and then we have the job of putting them in position. Deep holes are
dug just underneath the parapet of the trench, and into these holes
are placed the separate cylinders with the tops flush with the ground.
As each cylinder is placed into position the hole is covered with a
board, on top of which is placed a thing we call a ‘_Salzdecke_,’ which
is really a kind of quilt stuffed with peat moss and soaked in potash
solution so as to absorb any of the gases that may leak out.

“On top of the _Salzdecke_ are built up three layers of sandbags, so
that there is not much danger of the cylinders’ being hit by shell
fragments. This also serves to hide the cylinders in case a raid is
made, and the sandbags form an excellent firing step. In fact, you
would never guess that the gas was ready in position to make an
attack. All of this takes a long time to do, and then we have to wait
for a wind that is favourable.

“It may be weeks before the right time comes, but all the time the
pioneer officers and _Unteroffiziere_ make observations of the wind and
report back to somebody at headquarters. On the night fixed for the
attack all the infantry are warned beforehand. If the wind continues
favourable the sandbags are taken off, the domes removed from the
cylinders, and to each cylinder is attached a lead pipe which is bent
over the top of the parapet into No Man’s Land, with the end slightly
bent up, so that if any liquid comes out it is not wasted in the ground
but evaporates in the air. The end of the lead pipe is weighted with a
sandbag, so that it will not kick when the gas is turned on and blow
the gas back into our own trenches, as happened in one or two of the
earlier attacks. It is this kind of thing that makes gas unpopular in
the German Army.

“Eventually the time really does arrive for the attack, and the
pioneers stand by the cylinders, of which twenty form a battery; and
to each battery there are two pioneers and one noncommissioned officer
waiting to unscrew the taps. A signal is given by means of a rocket.
All the infantry have been eagerly waiting for this signal, which means
that they have five minutes to clear out of the front-line trenches
before the gas is turned on; and I can tell you they do not waste any
time. Everybody makes a rush to the support trench and leaves the front
line entirely to the pioneers.

“We all keep our masks ready to put on at a moment’s notice, because
in the earlier attack the wind on two occasions blew the gas back
again into our own trenches and killed a lot of the infantry who were
unprepared for its return. According to the length of time the attack
is to last the cylinders are turned on, from one up to five at a time,
in each battery.

“As soon as the taps are turned on the pioneers make for cover, but
they have a good many losses from bursting cylinders, from leaks, and
from the shrapnel and high-explosive shells which invariably greet the
start of an attack. The promptness with which this happened at the time
I was in the line made us believe that your people had known all about
our gas preparations for some time. The infantry are all very glad to
be away from the front-line trench when the cloud is sent over.”

This method has been practically unaltered throughout the time the
Germans have made gas attacks. In the first attack they probably had
one gas cylinder on every yard of front on which gas was installed, but
the number was increased in subsequent attacks.




CHAPTER II

  The first respirators--First-aid devices--the smoke helmet--Anti-gas
    sprayers--Their use and delicacy--The English chemists set to
    work--The task of training the whole army.


There is no need to dwell on the execration with which the use of gas
was met by the whole civilised world, and I will merely try to recount
how it was taken by the men in the trenches.

The British Tommy is a difficult man to terrify, and the moral effect
on the men, though quite unprotected, was remarkably small considering
the terrors of the game. For two or three days all we heard about were
the things we should do in the event of being similarly attacked. It
appeared that great chemists from England had immediately taken up the
question of providing efficient respirators, and until they came out
were advising people as to emergency measures. Some of these methods
seemed to us very funny. We were told, for example, that a respirator
could “easily” be made by knocking the bottom off a bottle, filling the
bottle with earth, and then learning to breathe with the neck of the
bottle stuck in the mouth. The breath was to be taken in through the
bottle and let out through the nose; but as bottles were scarce and few
of them survived the attempt to get the bottom broken off there was not
much doing.

However, we learned that handkerchiefs filled with earth and kept moist
would keep some of the gas out, and by the time the first novelty had
worn off we were receiving private respirators from England. These
had all been made in response to an appeal by Lord Kitchener to the
women of England to make respirators for the troops out of cotton wool
wrapped up in muslin or veiling. The result of this was that the War
Office was absolutely swamped with millions of these respirators within
a few days, and most fellows in the trenches had one or two sent out by
post straightaway.

Besides these, arrangements were made by the various divisions for
respirators to be made in towns behind the lines; and the government
factories in England got to work to turn out a simple type of
respirator which had been devised by the English chemists as the
quickest to make and the simplest to use. The result was that within
about one month we had four or five different kinds of respirators
issued to us. Most of these were simple pads of either cotton wool or
cotton waste. The earlier ones were soaked in washing-soda solution,
and the later ones were moistened with a special solution consisting
of ordinary photographic hypo and washing soda mixed with a little
glycerin.

One type that we had for a week or two in the trenches consisted of
the usual pad of cotton waste together with a small wad of the same
material which was kept separate. The respirators were stored in boxes
let into the paradoses, or rear walls of the trenches. On the alarm
being given each man in the trench made a dive for a respirator,
stuffed the wad into his mouth as a first protection, and then bound
the pad round his mouth and nose, the wad being afterward taken out of
his mouth and stuffed round his nose so as to make a tight fit.

These practices were popular for once or twice, but when it began to
be realised that the wads were not always used by the same man the
novelty waned. We thought we were getting pretty smart at it when we
could get every man in the trench fully protected--that is, with the
tapes tied--in forty seconds from the word “Go.”

Later on we had the official “black-veiling respirator,” which was
issued to all the British troops and which went through two or three of
the earlier attacks as the chief protection.

It was from one of these attacks delivered in the salient again, on the
twenty-fourth of May, that the first benefits of good training in the
use of the respirator were seen. One of the regiments which had been
on the flank of the first attack and had seen the effects of the gas
and what it really meant had taken the training very seriously, and
the officers had insured that every man had a respirator, kept it in
good condition, and knew how to use it in the quickest possible time
should occasion rise. Other regiments were not so good, and it was just
this training or lack of it that made all the difference between heavy
casualties and light casualties in subsequent attacks.

On the twenty-fourth of May the regiment mentioned above happened to
be in the very thickest part of the cloud, and though the battalion
on either side of it suffered serious losses they themselves came off
almost scot-free. Instances of losses from insufficient education in
the use of the respirator were numerous on this occasion. A lot of
men took their respirators off in the middle of the attack in order
to wet them with solution again; and as they did not wring them out
sufficiently the respirators were difficult to breathe through and the
men thought they were being gassed and repeated the dose--the result
being that they could not draw air through the sodden cotton waste, and
they were gassed either from pulling off the respirators altogether or
from the air coming in at the side.

One very bad instance was quoted by a medical officer at an advanced
dressing station which was taking in gas cases as they came down from
the line. Two or three men from one battalion came in pretty badly
gassed, but still able to walk. The M. O. asked them if they had
respirators issued to them. They said “Yes.”

“Well, why didn’t you put them on?”

They said: “We did put them on; we’ve got them on now.”

And so they had--strapped across their chests!

At that time respirators were generally carried by the men tied round
their caps, and in some cases could not be removed in time; and the
May twenty-fourth attack made it apparent that the respirators should
be carried in a position ready for immediate use. For this purpose a
waterproof cover was provided and the respirator kept in a small pocket
inserted into the jacket, or else in a pouch slung over the shoulder.

The other bad feature about the preparations was the arrangement for
dipping the respirators in solution in the trenches, as referred to
above. During the attack a lot of the men dipped their respirators in
water; which of course washed the chemicals out of the respirators and
made them ineffectual much sooner than they should have been. But all
of these matters were remedied before another gas attack was made.

After the first emergency respirator had been issued every effort was
made to devise a more effective form of protection than that given by
the cotton-wool pads, in expectation of a recurrence of German attacks.
As a matter of fact there were no attacks between the beginning of June
and December, 1915, because the wind was unfavourable to the Germans.
This was another point that they had apparently overlooked, because on
investigation we found that the prevailing winds in Flanders blew from
west to east, and that about three-quarters of the total winds were in
our favour and against the Germans.

The long interval of the summer of 1915 gave us a splendid opportunity
to develop the protection against gas which had been commenced in the
spring while attacks were still being made. The most important of
these developments were the invention of the celebrated “smoke helmet”
and the use of sprayers for the removing of gas from the trenches. We
also found out the exact value of certain other devices and methods
which had been suggested for combating the gas clouds, and a lot of
impossible ideas were consequently turned down.

The latter might be discussed first of all. One suggestion which was
made and believed in by most people at various times--including the
Germans themselves--was that fires built in the trenches or on the
parapet would cause such an upward draft as to lift up the gas cloud
and carry it safely over our heads. Experiments showed, however, that
this idea was absolutely false, because though an upward draft was
certainly formed the incoming air carried with it just as much gas from
the surrounding atmosphere, and nothing was gained by it. It was a long
time before the Germans tumbled to this, and even many months later
their own instructions on defence against gas included statements that
showed their reliance on this procedure.

One suggestion which actually reached the point of being acted on was
that the gas cloud could be dispersed by an explosion, and for this
purpose we were provided with wooden boxes filled with black powder and
with fuses attached, which we were supposed to light at the crucial
moment and throw into an advancing cloud. This heroic procedure was
never actually made use of, however, because experiments in the
meantime again showed that such explosions had very little effect on a
cloud of gas.

Two suggestions which really did turn out to be winners were those
referred to previously--the smoke helmet and the Vermorel sprayer for
clearing the trenches.

The idea for a respirator in the form of a helmet to go right over
the head is stated to have originated from an idea of a sergeant of
the Canadians who was gassed at Ypres, who stated that he had seen
some of the Germans through the gas cloud with things that looked like
flour bags pulled over their heads. It was thought that something of
this kind could actually be made use of, and experiments showed that
it was really a practical idea, because breathing is done through a
very big surface and not only through the chemicals directly in front
of the mouth and nose, as in the case of the respirator. By having
a big surface it is possible to have thinner material and there is,
therefore, less resistance to breathing. All that is required is to
tuck the helmet down inside the jacket and button the latter tightly
round it at the neck, and if this is done there is little possibility
of gas leaking in. As a matter of fact there is no evidence that the
Germans ever did use anything of the kind.

The first types of smoke helmet were made of flannel and had a window
for seeing through which was made of mica or celluloid. The helmets
were soaked in the same kind of solution--hypo, carbonate of soda
and glycerin--that had been employed for the respirators. Helmets of
this kind were capable of standing up against really considerable
concentrations of chlorine, and they were quickly recognised both by
the troops and by experts as being a very big improvement on the old
respirator.

These helmets were made and issued to the troops as quickly as
possible and a few of them were actually used in the attack of May
twenty-fourth. Men unpracticed in their use were apt to find them hot
and stuffy, and, not realising that the feeling wears off, were often
inclined to think that they were being suffocated or gassed. As a
matter of fact well-drilled men could do almost anything while wearing
the helmet, the chief difficulty being that of limited vision. After
wearing the helmet for a short time the celluloid window got clouded
over from the moisture in the breath, but this could easily be remedied
by wiping it on the forehead. In many cases also the windows got
cracked or broken from the rough treatment they were bound to meet in
trenches, and this was a constant danger until men learned how to fold
the helmet properly so as to protect the celluloid and to place a small
sheet of cardboard or thin wood over the window before folding.

The sprayers previously mentioned were originally suggested for use
against the gas cloud itself, the idea being that chemicals should be
sprayed at the cloud so as to neutralise the poisonous gas and thereby
purify the air. Nearly everybody with even a nodding acquaintance with
chemistry wrote in suggesting ammonia for this purpose, oblivious of
the fact that the chemical reaction between chlorine and ammonia in
these circumstances produces a dense cloud which is most irritating to
the eyes and throat, and that this together with the excess of ammonia
would be almost as bad as the original gas.

In any case it is impossible to deal with the gas cloud by spraying,
because of the enormous amount of chemicals and apparatus that would
be required to neutralise the attack. A cloud of chlorine from one
thousand cylinders, for example, would require more than forty tons of
the strongest ammonia solution obtainable to kill all the gas, even if
none of the spray were lost in the ground. Besides this the spraying
might have to be continued for hours, some of the attacks having lasted
intermittently for more than three hours.

It was quickly seen that this was an utter impossibility, but
experiments showed that a spray of the hypo solution was quite capable
of removing what remained of the gas cloud out of trenches and shell
holes and from dugouts into which the gas had penetrated. This of
course applied only to chlorine. Arrangements were therefore made for
supplying a large number of these sprayers, which are exactly the same
as those used for spraying fruit trees and potatoes with fungicides,
and men were specially trained in their use so that they could be
employed after an attack was over. These men were officially known as
the “Vermorel sprayer men,” and were popularly supposed to preface all
their operations with the words “Let us spray.”

The solution to fill the sprayers was kept in all the trenches in
corked rum jars, and there were many amusing incidents rising out
of the dual purpose to which these revered vessels were put. It is
stated that a certain battalion on going into the line for the first
time saw these rum jars safely ensconced in niches in the parapet and
immediately thought that they contained the rum ration concerning
which they had heard so much before they came out. Some of the more
adventurous ones surreptitiously tried out the supposed rum and drank a
few mouthfuls of the nauseous liquid before discovering their mistake.
The real joke lay in the fact that even after they realised that the
liquid was not rum they continued to drink it, and by the time they
finished their two days’ tour of instruction there was not a drop of
Vermorel sprayer solution left in any of the trenches.

The sprayers were somewhat delicate pieces of apparatus to keep in good
condition in the trenches, and were apt to get crusted with mud and
out of order unless they were well looked after. Like everything else
connected with the defence against gas, their condition in the trenches
varied with different regiments according as they were well trained and
disciplined or otherwise, but as a rule the sprayers were well enough
looked after, and proved extraordinarily useful on many occasions after
their first appearance in the line.

As stated before, the long interval of the summer and autumn of 1915
gave the chemists and the army plenty of opportunity for thinking about
the gas question, developing organisation and methods to meet attacks
in the future, and making arrangements for the training of the troops
so that they should be thoroughly prepared when the next attack should
arrive.

One of the most important things that was done was to start a big field
laboratory for dealing with questions of gas warfare. And as it had
already been realised that the whole basis of defence against gas was
going to lie in the hands of the troops themselves by increasing their
steadiness, developing their discipline, and generally accustoming
them to the idea that gas was now an ordinary method of warfare,
chemists and instructors were appointed for attachment to each of the
British armies.

These men were all chosen from the line. For the most part they were
infantry officers who could realise the real needs and limitations of
the troops, but they were picked in each instance because they had, at
any rate, some chemical knowledge and could translate into practice
for the benefit of the troops various chemical measures which had been
adopted for the latter’s safety. Their first chief job was to see that
respirators and smoke helmets were issued in sufficient number; to see
that they were in good condition; and then to arrange for the training
of all the troops in the army in their use. This was a heroic task, to
be accomplished in as short a time as possible, but by dint of speaking
to large bodies of officers and men at the same time it was so far
completed that all ranks were given practical instruction in the use of
the helmet.

When it is realised that each of these officers had to deal with at
least one hundred thousand troops it will be seen that it was no
mean feat that was accomplished. What was started then has never been
completely accomplished, partly because of the continual development of
gas warfare and partly because it is a matter of education--which is
always slow--but very largely also because of the continually changing
personnel and the enormous numbers of men that have had to be trained.




CHAPTER III

  Popular terror of gas--Necessity for drilling and early personal
    experience--Sure defence from gas possible--The first gas
    alarms--The prussic acid scare a myth--The phosgene scare a
    reality--The helmet made to combat it--Necessity for renovating
    the helmet.


The final object in the training of men in defence against gas is
that troops shall be able to protect themselves completely and as
quickly as possible in all the multitudinous circumstances in which
they may encounter the poisonous gas in the field. To attain this
it is necessary to inspire confidence by letting them in as far as
possible on the principles underlying the use of gas and the tactics
which are adopted by the enemy; and, secondly, to bring their practical
proficiency and discipline up to such a standard that they make the
very best use of the apparatus that is given to them.

It must be remembered that one of the greatest difficulties in talking
to people about gas is the mystery of it. Even educated people hardly
understand the word “gas” in connection with war and are apt to think
of coal gas and dentists’ gas in consequence. The result is that the
gas of the Germans was sometimes credited with all sorts of impossible
qualities of movement and deadliness, and it can hardly be realised
what alarm and distrust may exist in the raw recruit with regard to
gas until he has been given some instruction. This is even as great a
danger as the over-confidence of the veteran soldier, who may know just
as little about it.

Mere drilling and assertion are not sufficient to inspire confidence
and acquire proportion, and it was realised very early that personal
experience was needed. To gain this arrangements were made for every
man to see and smell gas in concentrations that would at any rate
produce severe discomfort if dwelt in for any length of time, and for
each soldier subsequently to be exposed to gas while wearing a gas
helmet in such a concentration that negligence in obeying orders or in
using the smoke helmet correctly would lead to real danger to life. By
this means confidence could be inspired in everybody, though there is
always a certain danger due to recklessness among the more adventurous
types.

Besides this it was necessary to give as many men as possible some
idea of the common sense of the operations in which the army was being
drilled. This could only be done by giving a clear idea of how the
gas is used; how gas travels; where it accumulates; how it can be
removed, and so on; and under what conditions a respirator or smoke
helmet protects or ceases to protect its wearer. It was on these lines
that instruction was built up; and to do it thoroughly it was found
that a large number of instructors were required in order to train the
officers and noncommissioned officers and to get them to treat their
respirators with as great respect as their rifles and to learn to carry
them through a gas-defence drill in just as smart a manner as the
ordinary arms.

For this purpose special schools of instruction were started at each
army headquarters, and as many regimental officers and noncommissioned
officers as possible were given a four or five days’ course of gas
training, so that they in their turn could go back to their regiments
and spread the gospel, as the responsibility for getting things done
must eventually fall upon them. Not only was it found impossible to
provide specialist officers for each regiment or battalion, but it
was recognised that such a procedure would have a bad effect on the
gas-defence measures.

Gas defence was a matter which affected everybody and was in no way
to be regarded as a specialist’s job; battalions were already full
of specialists. Indeed the colonels were apt to complain that they
had nobody but specialists to command. There were bombers, snipers,
signalers, machine gunners and sanitary men; and at that time the
trench-mortar personnel was also a part of the infantry battalion. With
all these things the feeling was that if a job could be looked on as
being a specialty it should be put on the specialist officer concerned,
and nobody else worried about it much. Now if gas defence was to become
Lieutenant Snook’s job, it meant that it was going to be nobody else’s
job, and it was essential that the idea should grow up in the army that
gas defence was a purely military matter and affected everybody.

What was said then is just as true to-day--that the defensive appliance
is a certain protection if it is used properly and in time. Defence
against gas is thus on an entirely different footing from defence
against shells and bullets, where protection cannot be assured; and, to
quote instructions on the subject: “For destructive effects gas must
depend on surprise, on poor discipline or on defective appliances.
Consequently gas casualties are preventable if the soldier is trained
continually to exercise vigilance and is well drilled in the use and
care of his respirator.”

The basis of the whole thing, therefore, was that every officer
should see that the men under his command were properly instructed in
defensive measures against gas attacks, and that all orders on the
subject were thoroughly understood. It was then up to the officers to
see that their men could get their helmets on properly in the minimum
time, and this involved considerable amount of drill practice. It was
pointed out to the officers that since protection had been provided,
those battalions which had been carefully instructed had come through
practically unharmed, while those battalions in which instructions had
been neglected suffered severely.

It was also up to the officers to explain to their men as much as they
themselves had learned about gas clouds, and to impress on them, for
example, that by moving to the rear they would move with the gas, and
that if they got flurried they would breathe more deeply and would run
much more risk of being gassed.

Besides these questions of instruction and drilling a lot of other
arrangements had to be made, so that warning of German gas attacks
should be spread in the quickest possible time. Arrangements were
made to install alarms of various kinds in the trenches. Of course no
reliance could be placed on any method of communication which involved
the use of the lungs. A man cannot blow a bugle or a whistle while he
has a helmet on, and if he waited to give a signal by such a method
before protecting himself he would be almost certain to be gassed. What
was done was to place bells and gongs made from shell cases up and
down the trenches.

At first these were rather futile things, the bells generally being
much too small--some of them merely cow bells. The shell cases were a
bit better and are still used for local alarms; but the arrangements
for giving warning were not really very good at that time. The best
devices were a number of motor horns, which were obtained locally, but
the supply was insufficient and there was no general issue. Later on
the alarm arrangements were tremendously improved. In some cases signal
lights were used, but so many different kinds of rockets were already
employed for signalling to the rear that there was great difficulty in
finding a light sufficiently distinctive. There was also the danger
that it could be quickly copied by the boche, who would thus amuse
himself by giving us all kinds of shocks from false alarms.

Quite as important as the provision of signals was the making of
observations to see when the wind was in a dangerous quarter. This was
done partly at the meteorological stations at headquarters and partly
on the front line itself. The latter was regarded at the time as the
most important, and orders were given that each unit in the front
line should rig up some kind of wind vane and learn to ascertain the
strength of the wind, so that they should be immediately prepared for
an attack whenever the wind was in a dangerous quarter.

Wind vanes in the trenches were of the simplest types and a great deal
of ingenuity was displayed in fitting up weathercocks that would be
capable of turning in really low wind--say, one with a speed of only
two miles an hour. The bearings for the central rod were the greatest
difficulty, but it was found that by boring out a rifle bullet a sharp
pointed stick or a thick piece of wire could be got to revolve in the
hollow bullet quite easily, what remained of the lead core acting as a
kind of lubrication.

The greatest nuisance of these wind vanes at first was that they were
made so generally obtrusive that they could be seen from the enemy’s
lines, and they nearly always drew fire from snipers, and sometimes
actually from the artillery. Presumably the enemy thought that where
the wind vanes were installed company headquarters were probably
situated. The position of the wind vanes consequently had to be chosen
so that the direction and speed of the wind would be measured several
feet above the ground without the apparatus being too obvious. One
of the simplest types of vane adopted, and one which could hardly be
seen from any distance, was a bit of a stick to the end of which was
tied ten to twelve inches of thin thread with a tiny bit of cotton
wool at the end. When the wind is blowing the direction taken by the
thread shows the line of the wind fairly exactly, and the behaviour of
the cotton wool in rising and falling indicates the strength of the
wind. The latter, however, was supposed to be measured by reference
to Beaufort’s scale, which depends on the movement in wind of natural
objects. Beaufort’s scale, which was devised long ago by an English
admiral of that name, is as follows:

Smoke moves straight up, speed of wind is _nil_; smoke slants, speed
is two miles an hour; the wind is felt on the face, speed is five
miles; paper, etc., move about, speed is ten miles; bushes are seen to
sway, speed is fifteen miles; tree tops sway and wavelets are formed
on water, speed is twenty miles; tree tops sway and whistle, speed is
thirty miles.

All of these arrangements for training and equipment of the troops were
hurried on as quickly as possible, but at the same time sight was not
lost of the probability of the German’s using gases different from the
chlorine which had originally formed their stand-by. It was felt that
a good all-round protection should be capable of keeping out not only
chlorine and similar gases but also others which were quite likely to
come into use.

During the whole of this time we were getting a lot of information from
the intelligence branch as to materials which the Germans were making
for use against us in their next gas attacks. Some of this information
was really farcical, but on the other hand some of it was very good
and helped to confirm the conclusions to which our own scientists were
coming as to the likelihood or unlikelihood of particular gases. In the
former category may be classed one story which came to us containing
a very circumstantial description of some experiments which were
stated to have been carried out in Berlin. These trials were stated
to have been made in what we considered a very proper place, namely,
Hagenbeck’s menagerie, where, in the presence of a large number of
military representatives, a new gas was tried out.

A noncommissioned officer appeared with a tank of the gas on his back,
the spraying nozzle coming out under his arm. A camel and an elephant
were brought out. The noncommissioned officer advanced toward them,
and at twenty paces’ distance he pressed down the lever on the tank
and out came some small black bubbles of gas, which floated down the
wind toward the faded animals. The bubbles burst, giving off a yellow
vapour, and the minute this vapour came in contact with the camel and
the elephant the beasts dropped down dead!

This sounded very terrible, but even in the conditions we were at the
time it was not taken too seriously, and of course nothing of this kind
has ever made its appearance.

Another story which commenced to make its appearance at that time
and which we have heard a great deal about ever since was that the
Germans were busy making prussic acid in enormous quantities for a huge
offensive which was to finish the war. It was stated that the Kaiser
had at last been persuaded to use this terrible weapon in order by its
use to finish the war at once and prevent needless suffering.

When they first made their appearance stories with regard to prussic
acid had to be taken a great deal more seriously than those like the
“little black bubbles.” For one thing we were unprotected against
prussic acid, and for another it was known of course to be an extremely
deadly poison. Indeed before the war it was regarded as the most
poisonous vapour known, so a great deal of weight was attached to these
statements, and experiments were at once put on foot to find protection
against prussic acid and to see exactly how poisonous it was compared
with other gases.

As a matter of fact prussic acid has not been used by the Germans
simply because it is not poisonous enough. It is not so poisonous, for
example, as phosgene, and a lot of captured German documents showing
the relative toxicity of different vapours always put it on a rather
low basis. It was this and not a desire to avoid utter barbarity which
decided the Germans not to use it. The ordinary German soldiers, just
like ourselves, still consider prussic acid as the most dangerous
possible material, and whenever they have a story to tell of a new gas
being invented or being got ready to use against us they will tell you
in awestruck tones that it is prussic acid.

The most valuable piece of information which we got was a complete
set of notes of some very secret lectures given to specially selected
senior officers at a conference in Germany. We gathered that this
conference was held behind closed doors and triple lines of sentries,
and all that kind of thing, and I cannot of course indicate how the
information came into our hands, but there it was. It described a lot
of new gases which had been considered, and stated among other things
that they intended to make a big gas attack against either the French
or ourselves in Flanders in December, 1915, some time before Christmas
when the wind was favourable. For this purpose they were going to
use a mixture of chlorine with another gas, phosgene--the amount of
phosgene to be twenty per cent of the whole.

Now phosgene had been realised by our own chemists as a very likely
gas to be used. I cannot say that it is more poisonous than chlorine,
but it is infinitely more deadly because it is much more difficult to
protect against and is more insidious in its nature. For one thing,
though it is an asphyxiant like chlorine it is possible for a man to be
only slightly gassed and think he is all right, and then, especially if
he takes any exercise in between, to fall dead several hours later from
heart failure.

The information was so complete that our arrangements to provide a
helmet which would protect against phosgene were hastened as much as
possible; and it was as well that they were, for the attack actually
did come off just about the time and place mentioned, in the Ypres
salient.

It was realised of course that any change in protection would have
to include both prussic acid and phosgene; and this is not nearly so
easy as it sounds. Phosgene is peculiarly chemically inert for such an
active poison, and it was some time before a reasonable protection
was found which could be incorporated in a smoke helmet. The substance
actually decided upon was a solution of sodium phenate--that is,
carbolic acid dissolved in caustic soda, the mixture containing an
excess of caustic. This solution is quite capable of dealing with
reasonable concentrations of phosgene and would successfully protect
against three parts of phosgene to ten thousand of the air, which in
the circumstances was quite good enough. The French also altered their
protection at the same time and used sodium sulphanilate as the basis
of protection against phosgene. The objections against the sodium
phenate were that it could not be absorbed into a flannel helmet owing
to its destruction of the fabric, and on account of its being strongly
caustic it would tend to burn the faces of the men it came in contact
with. These difficulties were overcome by making the helmet of two
layers of flannelette instead of one layer of flannel, and by mixing
with the sodium phenate a large quantity of glycerin. This kept the
fabric moist and prevented the caustic from exerting its corrosive
action.

It was realised from the start that a smoke helmet containing free
alkali would deteriorate considerably on exposure to air, and it was
found advantageous to provide a breathing tube in the mask so that
a man would breathe in through the helmet and out through an outlet
valve; in this way the breath, which contains a lot of carbonic acid,
would have no bad effect on the chemicals. The use of an outlet valve
was also found to have the advantage of keeping the air purer inside
the helmet and preventing the stuffy feeling which accompanied the
older types of helmet.

This additional complication to the helmet was not looked upon
favourably at first by the troops, but it was very quickly realised
that only a little practice was required to make a man breathe quite
normally in the way mentioned above, and that the advantages accruing
from the alteration were very great indeed. We found that we could
carry on for much longer stretches of time without being fagged
out, and more exact trials by the scientists showed that a man’s
temperature, pulse and rate of breathing did not increase nearly so
rapidly if he used an outlet valve as when breathing out and in
through the same material. This is largely due to what is called “dead
space,” which means the volume of air in between the lungs and the
atmosphere and in which the air is largely composed of breath exhaled
from the lungs. The smaller this space the easier it is to breathe.

This principle of using an outlet valve has been retained in all the
British respirators which have been invented since and is regarded as
one of the very highest importance.

Another thing which had to be taken care of was that the new helmets,
which were called “tube” or “P” helmets, would gradually deteriorate
on exposure to air, and would consequently have to be withdrawn from
the troops in the line from time to time in order to redip them in
chemicals and make them as effective as before. For this purpose large
repair factories were started at the bases and were placed in charge
of Englishwomen who were brought over for the purpose. These factories
were organised with local labour, helped out by a little military
personnel, and were capable of washing the helmets returned from the
line, redipping them in new solution, and sending them back in good
condition again.

This was no small job, as the smoke helmets which were sent in were
generally filthy dirty, sometimes soaked in mud and sodden with water,
and requiring very careful handling to be brought back into good
condition. All sorts of things got back with these helmets to the
repair stations, and it was not an uncommon thing for the satchels
containing the helmets to be found to hold anything from a live hand
grenade to the photograph of some girl, which had been stored there for
safe keeping. Both then and later we always had considerable difficulty
in preventing Tommy from using his helmet satchel, and later on his box
respirator satchel, for these illicit purposes. He seemed to consider
that if he had to carry another haversack he had a perfect right to put
in it whatever he liked--rations, knives and forks, ammunition, private
knickknacks of all kinds. This of course had to be stopped, owing to
the damage these things might do to the respirator and the difficulty
they might make in getting it out quickly.

During September and October, 1915, there were several scares as to the
imminence of gas attacks by the Germans, and on one or two occasions
it was definitely stated that the cylinders were actually in position
in their trenches. This helped to hasten things up, and the factories
in England and the repair stations in France kept themselves busy in
producing the new type of helmet. A large number of them were actually
issued to the troops by the time the Battle of Loos was started, and
were consequently employed by our men when the first gas attacks were
made, in September of that year.

It was these helmets which appeared in so many of the picture papers
showing the charge of some British Territorial infantry through the gas
cloud at the beginning of the battle, and there is no question about
it that the men had a very fearsome appearance. With the hood over
the head and the two big goggle eyes, and the outlet valve sticking
out where the nose should be, it is small wonder that the Germans
described them as “devils,” and were so terrified as not to be able to
put up much fight on the front where the particular charge was made.




CHAPTER IV

  The attack of December, 1915--The Allies’ good training tells--The
    casualties analysed--The new element of surprise--Evidences of the
    use of phosgene--The incident of the bulb--Improved alarms--The
    Strombos sirens--Accidents to the horns--The Tear Gas Shell--Its
    chemical analysis--Combated by anti-gas goggles--Tommies scoff at
    Tear Gas--The Germans make it formidable.


The expected German gas attack was actually made on December 19, 1915,
at about 5:15 A. M., just before “Stand to” in the morning, the venue
being the north of the Ypres salient, from the canal bank at Boesinghe
down to Wieltje, a distance of three miles. It was preceded by the
appearance of parachute lights of an unusual kind and by a number of
red rocket flares. Almost immediately afterward gas was smelt in the
front trenches. In some cases a hissing sound made by the gas’s leaving
the cylinders was heard and was taken as a warning by the soldiers in
the trenches. In other cases the noise seems to have been deadened
by rifle fire. Taking it altogether, however, there was very little
warning, as the wind was favourable and the gas traveled surprisingly
quickly.

There was absolutely no confusion, and the men put on their helmets at
once and lined the parapets within a minute. Where the trenches were
close together the men had some difficulty in getting on their helmets
in time. This was particularly the case in listening posts where we
had patrols out quite close to the German wire. In the support and
reserve trenches the arrangements for spreading the warning were not
so good as those in the front line, and a number of men were caught by
the gas before they had their helmets on. Indeed in a number of cases,
especially in batteries, the gas was smelt before the receipt of the
warning.

The actual gas wave lasted only about half or three-quarters of an
hour, but in some places the helmets had to be kept on for four hours,
as the gas hung about in hollows and dugouts for a long time. This was
particularly noticeable in the neighbourhood of the canal. The cloud
was felt as far back as Vlamertinghe, eighty-five hundred yards behind
the line, and was still visible at this point. For at least three
miles back behind the front-line helmets had to be put on everywhere,
and for six miles behind the line the smoke helmets were generally
worn, some men who did not put them on at this distance being gassed.

The actual gas wave was accompanied by a heavy bombardment of the
front line and of Ypres and the villages behind it, shrapnel and
high-explosive shell and also tear shell being used, the latter shell
being fired particularly against our artillery. This bombardment
lasted throughout the day and most of the following night. Though our
wire had been cut in many places by the artillery fire, the Germans
made no serious infantry attack, and small patrols which left their
trenches in a few places were immediately shot down, as our fellows
were continually on the alert and had not suffered to any considerable
degree.

Altogether a large number of troops were exposed to the gas, but,
compared with its extent, the cloud caused only a small number of
casualties. This was very satisfactory after our experiences of the
spring. Men who were gassed but not killed were all subsequently
questioned as to the reason for their being gassed, and in each case a
definite reason was forthcoming. In no single instance was the fault
laid at the door of the smoke helmet, which apparently had been quite
capable of standing up to the highest concentrations in any part of the
cloud.

Among the reasons given for the casualties were things like the
following: Some men in the fire trenches did not get on their helmets
quickly enough owing to the short distance between the trenches, lack
of warning in the support line and insufficient practice. Some officers
and men sleeping in dugouts did not have their helmets attached to them
or they were caught away from their dugouts without helmets. Helmets
in many cases were under the overcoats, which made it very difficult
to get them and put them on quickly, as it was necessary to undo the
overcoat, the top button of the jacket and the cardigan waistcoat
before the helmet could be tucked in. One cause of casualties was that
the “P” helmet smelt very strongly of carbolic, and a lot of men who
had not had this explained to them thought that the peculiar smell
was that of gas coming in and they took their helmets off with a
view to replacing them with other helmets. This of course was fatal.
One sergeant was gassed through his helmet’s being holed by a bullet,
though he himself was not wounded. In some cases wounded men tried to
remove their helmets and were gassed in this way, and it was found
necessary to watch men who were hit to prevent this.

In many ways this attack of the Germans was of the greatest importance,
as it displayed all of the features on which the subsequent
development of the gas cloud was based. These features were: Increased
concentration; the use of new material; surprise. These three things
are really the basis of all gas warfare, even at the present day,
whether the attacks are made in the form of clouds or by the use of gas
shells or other projectiles.

The increased concentration was obtained chiefly by the reduction in
the time occupied by the attack. The first attack of all lasted about
one hour and a half. The next attack lasted about three hours. The one
in question lasted only thirty minutes, so that if the same amount of
gas was used the concentration of the cloud must obviously have been
increased six times over that of May twenty-fourth, as there is little
doubt that the cylinders had been installed in approximately the same
numbers--that is, one to a meter of front.

Probably the most important feature of the attack was the introduction
of phosgene. Now there never was any actual chemical evidence of the
poisons of phosgene in the German gas clouds until some of their
cylinders were captured by us when they retreated on the Somme in the
beginning of 1917. But unfortunately the peculiar effects of phosgene
on our men who were gassed were only too apparent. There were a large
number of “delayed” cases--men who thought they were only slightly
gassed but who became ill or even died several hours or sometimes a day
or so later from heart failure, especially if they had taken any heavy
exercise in between.

In these cases there was hardly any coughing. What was really wanted
was rest, but this was not realised at the time, and many men walked
to the dressing stations--sometimes a mile or more--through deep
mud and became quite exhausted. One officer of the Durhams had been
slightly gassed at the beginning of the attack but felt perfectly all
right until about noon, when he became faint and exhausted, though
not apparently seriously ill. After lying down he felt better, but in
the evening got worse again, and in walking to the ambulance to go to
the field dressing station he suddenly collapsed and died. This was
fourteen hours after the attack.

Another weighty piece of evidence as to the nature of the gas was given
by the smell, which to trained observers was quite different from the
typical chloride-of-lime smell of chlorine; and by the peculiar effects
on the taste of tobacco to men who had smelt the gas. If you take a
good smell of dilute phosgene and then smoke a cigarette the tobacco
tastes like nothing on earth. Tommy’s nearest description of the taste
and smell is “mouldy hay.” This peculiar effect is quite typical of
phosgene and is known as the “tobacco reaction.”

In the hope of getting samples of the German gas clouds for analysis
a large number of gas vacuum bulbs were distributed up and down the
line, and selected men were taught how to use them. This was supposed
to be done by nipping off the drawn-out end of the gas bulb, whereby
the contaminated air would rush in. The end was then to be closed with
a hollow stopper containing wax.

To get these samples was asking a great deal. Even when packed in
special boxes glass bulbs are somewhat fragile things for trench life,
and the wooden boxes made excellent kindling wood, which was always
being sought for. The result is that when the cloud does come along
the vacuum bulbs are often conspicuous only by their absence. Even
if they are kept whole it is asking rather a lot of a man to take an
accurate scientific sample during the excitement of a gas attack which
is accompanied by a bombardment by explosive shells and gas shells.

For a long time none of the bulbs found their way back to the field
laboratory. Eventually one did come, carefully packed in shavings and
wadding. I happened to be present when it was brought in, and there was
a good deal of excitement at the little prodigal’s return. The bulb was
taken out, but under it was found a leaf from a field-service note
book, on which was written: “Danger. This bulb was found in a hedge.
It seems to have been dropped from an aeroplane and probably contains
cholera germs. Fortunately it has not been broken.”

The “surprise effect,” which was mentioned above as being the third
fresh feature of this new-era gas-cloud attack, took the form of making
the attack in the dark and at a time when men were least prepared--that
is, just before the morning “Stand to,” the hour before dawn, when all
troops in the trenches stand to arms. By making the attack at night,
or at any rate in the dark, the boche achieved two objects: First of
all, there were better wind conditions for an attack, because the
night winds tend to flow down toward the earth and keep the gas cloud
low-lying and thick, whereas in the day the sun warms the ground and
produces so many upward currents of air that the cloud gets lifted up
and dissipated; in the second place it was impossible to see the cloud
when it was first liberated, and this reduced the means of detecting
the attack to only two--the hissing noise of the gas escaping from the
cylinders and the smell of the advanced parts of the cloud.

Later on it was known that the best hours for all gas attacks, both
cloud and shell bombardment, are in the night; and as a matter of
fact practically all gas warfare is now carried out at night, but at
that time the significance of this was not grasped, and many of our
casualties were due to lack of preparedness, numbers of men being
caught “on the hop” and overwhelmed.

Some most important steps in improving our protecting measures were
taken as a result of the lessons learned from the attack; in fact, it
may be taken that all measures in defence against gas have been learned
from bitter experience, and to this extent the sufferings of the
victims may be taken as having at any rate some compensating value. In
such a new and strange and continually developing kind of warfare very
little can be done by _a priori_ argument. This fact we have always
tried to impress on the men--that the gas warfare orders, sometimes
apparently trivial and frequently wearisome and annoying, have all been
made as the result of lessons learned from actual attacks.

Among the chief things that were done after the December nineteenth
attack was the improvement of our system of alarms.

The bells and horns in the front line had been found quite
insufficient, especially for warning people in the rear; and the
telephone could not be depended on for this purpose owing to the
possibilities of the wires being cut by shell fire. To protect them
from being cut, all wires would have to be buried at least six feet
deep in the ground, and this is practically impossible owing to the
work involved.

It would consequently be fatal to depend on telephonic communication,
especially as a gas attack is nearly always accompanied by a pretty
heavy bombardment of rear lines. In one case I knew, during just such
a bombardment, the staff captain at a brigade headquarters was talking
to one of the battalions when the whole telephone instrument seemed
to burst into a sheet of flame in his hands, owing to a cut wire. The
battalion concerned was isolated for more than an hour as a result,
and anything might have happened in the meantime.

For these reasons it was decided to adopt for gas alarms sirens worked
by compressed air, which would make a noise sufficiently loud and
distinctive to be heard long distances away. The type of siren which
was used has been kept in use ever since in continually increasing
numbers and has proved extraordinarily useful. It is known as the
Strombos horn, and consists of the horn proper and two iron cylinders
of compressed air charged to a pressure of one hundred and fifty
atmospheres. Only one cylinder at a time is connected to the horn, the
other being kept as a reserve.

The Strombos horns are mounted in the trenches in such a way as to
protect them from shell splinters as far as possible. This is generally
done by packing them round carefully with sandbags, only the mouth of
the horn being displayed and pointing toward the rear. Every sentry
must know how and when to sound the horn. All he has to do when he
realises that a gas attack is being made, or on receiving instructions
from an officer to do so, is to loosen the tap on the cylinder one
complete turn, when the horn will sound continuously for more than a
minute. The noise is terrific and in an enclosed space or in a quiet
region it is absolutely deafening. In the trenches, however, it is none
too loud, and the distances between the horns in the front system of
trenches are never more than four or five hundred yards. Farther back
in the chain, toward the rear, the distances can be increased. Horns
are now installed at battalion, brigade and divisional headquarters.
By turning them on when the noise of those in front is heard it is
possible to pass the alarm in an incredibly short space of time and
thus forestall the cloud of gas to such an extent that every man in the
support trenches or in rest billets or the villages behind the firing
line is aware that an attack is in progress and gets ready to protect
himself.

Naturally, things don’t always work out exactly according to schedule.
The horns are frequently damaged. In one place I was at, just this
side of the canal, near Boesinghe, a heavy German trench mortar
wrecked three of our Strombos horns within a week, and another and
less suitable position had to be found for the alarm. Then there are
occasional false alarms. These sometimes arise from individual men
“getting the wind up” from a bombardment by gas shell and thinking that
a cloud attack is being made. Others I am afraid have been more in the
nature of experiments “to see how it works.” After all, it must be a
great temptation to a sentry to be in charge of a Strombos horn and
never have the pleasure of turning it on.

False alarms are a great nuisance, however, and good arrangements have
now been made to prevent their spreading. It is possible to avoid
all the unnecessary disturbance to which troops are subjected by a
false gas alarm. This disturbance is particularly objectionable in
back areas where regiments returned from the trenches are in billets.
When the alarm goes everybody has to turn out--probably in the middle
of the night. Sentries wake the officers and men in all the billets;
messengers have to be sent post-haste to outlying villages or farms
with which there is no telephonic communications; respirators are
hurriedly inspected and placed in the alert position; the gas-proof
curtains of cellars and dugouts are adjusted; the officers move about
in the darkness to see that all their men are accounted for and ready;
every one is in a state of expectancy--and then the word comes through
that it is a false alarm, and the men go back, cursing, to their
billets. Not only is an occurrence of this kind wearying to tired
troops, but it has the old disadvantage of crying “Wolf, wolf!” when
there is no wolf--the consequent determination on the part of the men
not to take the next alarm so seriously.

Though it was not realised at the time, it is almost certain that the
Germans started to use gas in shell almost simultaneously, and probably
actually in the first attack, with the use of the poisonous gas clouds
in the attacks of April and May, 1915. Many instances came to notice of
men’s eyes being strongly affected to such an extent that they could
not keep them open. There seemed to be something in the air which made
an unprotected man weep copiously if he tried to keep his eyes open,
and of course if he closed them he could not see what he was doing.

These effects, and a peculiar smell which was noticed both during and
after the gas-cloud attacks, gave rise to the belief that something
like formaldehyde was being used by the Germans mixed with some
chlorine gas. Others described the smell as being that of chloroform
or ether, but nobody could say definitely what the material actually
was. It was only after a number of blind shell had been obtained and
examined that it was realised that the Germans were firing shell filled
with liquid which had a powerful lachrymatory effect.

It does not appear certain whether the use of lachrymatory liquids
for putting men out of action by making their eyes water is in itself
contrary to The Hague Convention, as the vapours need not actually be
poisonous. This was the case with the first German gas shell, as it
was found that the liquid contained consisted only of a material known
chemically as “xylyl bromide.” The vapour of this liquid and of many
similar substances has a most powerful effect on the eyes, like that of
onions but much stronger. Except in very high concentrations it cannot
be regarded as poisonous--at any rate not in the sense that chlorine is
poisonous.

Examination of the German lachrymatory shells showed that the liquid
was contained inside the shell in a sealed lead vessel so that the
material should not come in contact with the steel of the shell, which
it destroys gradually. Shell of this kind, though termed gas shell, are
not really such, as the liquid has to be broken up into fine droplets
by the explosive charge of the shell before the vapour can produce its
effect. The liquid has no pressure of its own inside the shell and
depends entirely on the bursting charge to get it distributed into the
atmosphere.

The xylyl bromide used by the Germans was not pure, but contained a
big proportion of benzyl bromide, showing that it had been made by the
action of bromide on coal-tar light oil from which most of the toluene
had been removed for the manufacture of the well-known high explosive,
trinitrotoluene.

The effect of xylyl bromide on an unprotected man is instantaneous
and remarkable. Even such small proportions as one volume of vapour
diluted with one million volumes of air will at once make a man weep so
copiously that he cannot possible keep his eyes open.

Obviously a material of this kind has great military value, for though
it does not put men out of action permanently by killing them it
neutralises their effectiveness to such an extent that for the time
being they may be regarded as of no military importance. In strong
concentrations the effect on the eyes is most powerful. I have walked
into an area which was being bombarded with lachrymatory shells
and suddenly got the effect just as if I had been hit in the face.
Fortunately the lachrymation has no lasting effect on the eyes, and a
man on getting into pure air very quickly recovers.

Throughout the spring and summer of 1915 these lachrymatory shells
were used in considerable numbers, especially in the vicinity of
Ypres, and at times the ramparts of that much bombarded town reeked
of lachrymatory vapour and nobody could stay in certain spots for
any length of time without having his eyes protected by specially
constructed goggles or by wearing a gas helmet right over his head.

Taking it altogether we were not troubled nearly so much by this new
type of gas as were the French, in the southern part of the line. In
much the same way that the gas cloud was developed by the Germans
against the English the gas shell were developed chiefly against the
French, and very much larger numbers were employed against the French
positions than we had to contend with during the first six months or
so. Later on things were more equallised in this direction. Captured
German documents and statements by prisoners showed us that the
Germans were counting very considerably on the effect produced by the
lachrymatory shell, and detailed instructions for their use in various
circumstances were carefully laid down. The lachrymatory shell was
known by the Germans as “T-Shell,” and the xylyl bromide as “T-Stoff,”
and instructions were laid down for the use of this material. Another
kind of shell was known as “K-Shell,” which up to that time had not
been used against us, or at any rate had not been recognised.

The T-Shell was particularly to be used against positions which it
was not intended to occupy immediately, the reason for this being
that T-Stoff hangs about for a long time. Some of the liquid is apt
to be spread about the ground and gives off enough vapour to make the
neighbourhood of the shell hole uninhabitable for many hours, and in
favourable condition--for the enemy--for several days. The K-Shell, on
the other hand, was intended to be used against infantry positions and
strong-points which it was hoped to assault and capture within an hour
or two of the bombardment or on areas which it was hoped to traverse
during a big attack.

The advent of the lachrymatory T-Shell incommoded us considerably, but,
as it was quickly realised that the gas was not poisonous, the Tommies
were not much taken back, and the “tear shell,” as they were quickly
called, were not considered by the rank and file to have importance,
which as a matter of fact they have; but at the same time we heard
rather alarming stories of the effects of gas shell as used against
the French.

It was rumoured, for example, that in the Crown Prince’s big advance in
the Argonne, in the late spring of 1915, that such enormous numbers of
gas shell had been used against the French positions that the infantry
occupying them were not only put out of action by the effect on their
eyes but that the amount of gas used was so large that the French
soldiers were actually anæsthetised and were taken prisoners by the
Germans while in an unconscious condition.

Whether this was true or whether it was exaggerated is not certain,
though it is certainly true that the Crown Prince’s advance was
prefaced by a hurricane bombardment of gas shell, the tactical effect
of which was considerable.

Stories of this kind, however, combined with the effects which we
ourselves were experiencing, made us realise that protection against
tear gas was essential, and for this purpose arrangements were made to
supply every officer and man in the front line with a pair of anti-gas
goggles. The earliest types of these goggles were very simple in
construction, and we are told were copied from a French pattern. They
consisted of a waterproof fabric lined with flannel containing a wire
spring for the nose and fitted with celluloid eyepieces. By bending the
wire to the shape of the nose it was possible to close the nostrils and
at the same time give a reasonably good fit to the flannel on the face.

In some cases the flannel was anointed with some kind of grease so as
to make a still closer fit, in order to keep out small traces of gas
which are quite sufficient to produce lachrymation. Later on we had a
much better type of goggle backed with rubber sponge to make a tight
fit to the face.

With the small numbers of gas shell used against us we had no
experience of any effect on the lungs, and it was found also that the
helmet form of respirator was enough to keep out, at any rate, low
concentrations of the lachrymator; but we got a rude awakening when
the boche began to use his tear shells in larger numbers. Such a case
happened to us in the beginning of 1916, at the celebrated village
of Vermelles, a little ruined town just behind the lines near Loos.
The enemy tried out an attack on us over about a mile front for the
purpose of bagging some of our trenches, and he attempted to keep
reinforcements from coming up to counter attack him by putting down a
tear-shell barrage through Vermelles and north and south of it over the
roads on which our fellows would have to advance. He used thousands
of his tear shells and the neighbourhood absolutely stank of them.
Fortunately, it was almost impossible to put down an effective standing
barrage with gas, and our reserves got through on two roads that had
not been blocked effectively. The boche attack was a fizzle, but
Vermelles was a little private hell of its own for that day and most of
the next forty-eight hours as well.

During and immediately after the bombardment, troops passing through
the village wore both goggles and gas helmets, but the concentration
of lachrymator was so great that many of our fellows were sick and
actually vomited inside their helmets. If you can imagine men going
up to a battle with these flannelette bags over their heads and
then being sick inside them, you can realise that the boche was not
particularly popular with us at the time.

Besides this, Vermelles was much used by troops in reserve and was full
of cellars and dugouts occupied by the waiting infantry and also by
signallers, headquarters of various kinds, and so on. The vapours--and
some of the shells themselves, for that matter--got down into these
cellars and made them almost uninhabitable for days, except in those
cases where they had been properly protected by double lines of
blankets hung at the entrances.

About the same time in 1916 the enemy began making surprise
bombardments with a new lachrymator and with the K-Shell mentioned
previously, for the purpose of assisting in raids. Both of these gases
rejoice in long names, the lachrymator being bromethylmethylketone, and
the K-Shell gas monochlormethylchloroformate. These gases are much more
poisonous and do not hang about as long as the old “T” tear gas.

One such raid in which they were used was carried out at a place
called La Boiselle--afterward famous as a jumping-off point in the
Somme Battle.

I was not in at the raid, but heard details of it afterward. The boche
rained his gas shells into the selected area and at the same time
prevented reinforcements from getting up by putting down a so-called
box barrage with explosive shells round the trenches to be attacked.

Our men were taken completely by surprise. Many of them were badly
gassed, all were temporarily blinded; and then after a short interval
the boche came in. He timed his arrival so that most of the gas had
disappeared. Then there was some very fierce fighting--so fierce that a
number of our men died afterward because of the exertion following on
the breathing of the K-gas.

But gassed and blinded men, however brave, cannot fight successfully
against others fresh and unaffected, and the enemy captured a number of
prisoners and two Lewis guns.

Curiously enough, during the Somme Battle a few months later we did
in properly the regiment which had carried out the raid and captured
the official report of the commander of the raiding party. In this
report he said: “... the men of the Royal Irish Rifles created a fine
impression both as regards their physique and their mode of repelling
an assault. Had it not been for the use of the gas shells it would have
been impossible to clear the section of trench attacked.”

Rather a fine tribute--and one thoroughly deserved!

Of course surprises of this kind cannot be pulled off twice, but
occurrences like this and the bombardment at Vermelles let us see that
the enemy intended to develop his gas-shell industry much more than
we had anticipated, and our protective measures were taken in hand so
as to meet future eventualities. In fact it was about this time that
the box respirator was being hurriedly developed so as to protect us
against any further devilment that Fritz might send along.




CHAPTER V

  Summer of 1916 the highwater mark of the German gas cloud--Their
    improved methods--The need of speed and secrecy--Gas as a rat
    exterminator--Causes of Allied casualties--Germans killed with
    their own gas--Gas masks for horses and mules--Reduced Allied
    casualties--Humorous incidents.


The great time for the German gas troops was undoubtedly 1916, and
from April to August of that year they carried out five big cloud gas
attacks on the British alone, not counting several on the French Front
and a number against the Russians.

During the interval from the December attack of the previous year
they had obviously been thinking hard and preparing lots of gas, for
the new attacks showed several fresh features both as regards extent
and tactics. Along the lines of making the gas more poisonous, using
greater quantities and higher concentration and the springing of
surprises, everything was done to make the gas cloud an even more
deadly affair than it had been in previous shows. That our own
casualties were much less than before, and that the boche in at least
one case had a lot more killed by his own gas than we had, were very
satisfactory results of all the labour and research as far as we were
concerned.

For the same reason that the December attack had been reduced in
duration to half an hour, the new clouds lasted only ten to fifteen
minutes; thus once more multiplying the concentration by two or three.
On top of this the amount of phosgene was increased up to at least
twenty-five per cent and probably to about fifty per cent, so that in
this way also the cloud became much more deadly than before. It is
interesting to note that pure phosgene cannot be used, otherwise the
Germans would undoubtedly have employed it. Straight phosgene does not
come out of the cylinders satisfactorily--it must have a big proportion
of something like chlorine mixed with it to force it out and get it
into the air as quickly as may be.

All of this made the gas cloud a nasty thing to face. As it became
progressively more deadly it required less and less to kill. A couple
of breaths of the poisoned air became enough to kill a man; but as
our protection was good enough, it meant that the most important thing
for the enemy to do was to take us unawares by getting his gas over so
quickly or deceiving us in some other way that we should be down and
out almost before we knew it. This is where his surprise tactics came
in.

These tactics consisted in attempting a great secrecy in the
preparations, in the use of smoke clouds to put us off the real track
of the gas, and the putting over of a number of different waves of gas
at varying intervals. The value of the last two will be more apparent
from the accounts of the individual attacks, but the importance of the
first-mentioned method must be emphasised a bit.

It must be remembered that the carrying in of the gas cylinders is the
work of the infantry and, as we discovered ourselves when we started
retaliation, is a very unpopular job owing to the difficulties of the
carry. Any carelessness in allowing the cylinders to clank by bumping
against each, other or against any other metal objects in the trenches,
or metallic sounds made by rather bored pioneers in unscrewing the
domes or attacking the pipes, are going to give away the fact to the
opposing side that something unusual is going on. And something unusual
going on or suspected generally spells g-a-s in the trenches.

In some cases, too, the opposing trenches can be seen from observation
posts--O. P.’s or O. Pips, as they are called in British Army
parlance--and in such cases if the carrying is started or the
installation of the cylinders is continued during the day there is a
good chance of the whole show being blown on by some watchful observer
with a telescope to his eye a mile or so away. All this the boche
realised and made his arrangements accordingly. But in at least one
case, in April, in his anxiety to get the cloud over without diminution
of strength and so that we should have little time for protecting
ourselves and spreading the alarm, he chose as his venue for the
attack a big portion of the line where the trenches were very close
together--seldom, in fact, more than fifty yards apart. Of course
it is just in such circumstances that secrecy of preparation is of
the greatest importance--but at the same time it is of the greatest
difficulty to maintain. As a matter of fact the Germans overreached
themselves by this choice of position, and little indications spotted
by our watchful sentries and patrols made us pretty certain that a
gas attack was impending, and our watchfulness and preparedness were
correspondingly increased and a constant state of “Gas Alert” kept up.

The first two attacks of the year were made against the 16th--the
Irish Division. This was the division in which Willie Redmond was a
captain, and it was composed of some of the best fighting material in
the world--all Nationalist Irishmen and anxious to get one over at
Fritz. Whether the Irishmen were chosen as a target with the foolish
idea of “putting the wind up,” or whether it was out of revenge for
their appearance in the British ranks after all the labour that had
been expended in trying to spread sedition in Ireland, we do not know.
Whatever the idea was it terminated in most abject failure, for the
Irishmen came through both attacks wonderfully well and absolutely
smashed up the German infantry advances which were attempted after the
passage of the cloud. Both attacks were made on that part of the line
near Hulluch running for about two miles south from Cité St. Elie.

The Germans opened the ball by letting our support and reserve lines
have a heavy bombardment of tear shells. Almost immediately after, in
the dim light of the early dawn, the first gas cloud floated over. It
was very thick and had been largely mixed with smoke in the hope of
leading our fellows to believe that it was terribly strong. It was not.
But the cloud was so dense that even at brigade headquarters, three
miles behind the front line, it was impossible to see across the road.
There was enough gas in this mixed cloud to make it very dangerous and
uncomfortable to unprotected men, but there were very few casualties.
The alarm was quickly spread, the men remained cool, and an attempted
attack by the enemy infantry to follow up the cloud was smashed up
without being able to get closer than our barbed wire.

After this first wave there was a tendency among the men to regard
the danger as over and to congratulate themselves on the apparent
and obvious boche failure. As they were prepared to go through with
anything the boche could put over, there was a natural tendency to
underrate the effects of gas, seeing it had caused them no losses.
It is undoubtedly true that a number of helmets were discarded
entirely--some of the soldiers thought they were useless after being
through an attack, and threw them away, depending entirely on their
reserve helmets. These they omitted to place in the “Alert” position,
pinned up on their chests ready for immediate use. In one or two cases
which came to my notice officers and men went off to the latrines or to
headquarters without helmets at all. This of course, was not general,
but it shows how some of our men fell for the boche ruse, which
consisted of putting over a second wave two hours later on exactly the
same Front.

The second cloud was a frightfully strong one, composed entirely of
gas in the highest possible concentration. It was this wave which
caused all our losses on April twenty-seventh, as it took a number of
men completely by surprise. But even so, the Irishmen were not a bit
dismayed, and when the Germans again attempted to advance--parties
of their bombers in some cases appearing immediately behind the gas
cloud--they were met by such a stout resistance that those who were not
shot down retired in disorder to their own trenches.

The intensity of the second wave can be gathered from the fact that
buttons and ammunition were quickly corroded and turned a villainous
green colour. In a few cases rifles stuck and Lewis guns jammed, owing
to the effects of the gas on the ammunition and the breach mechanism.
One good thing about the attack was that most of the rats in the
trenches were killed. In some parts of the line the trench rats are an
absolute plague. They eat any food or candles left lying about or kept
in cardboard boxes. They swarm in the dugouts and appear in all sorts
of odd corners. They disturb the little rest one does get; and I have
had them run all over me, even over my face, while lying in my dugout.
All attempts to clear them out were useless. But what ferrets and
terriers and virus could not accomplish the boche gas did. Mister Rat
cannot stand up to a strong mixture of chlorine and phosgene without a
gas mask, and so in this attack, as in others we experienced, he died
by hundreds; and nobody mourned him.

Curiously enough two kittens, which inhabited the dugout of the
commanding officer of one of the battalions of the Scottish Borderers,
who were in reserve, came through alive. The kittens were badly
gassed and lay breathing rapidly, suffering from spasms and with
profuse salivation. Possibly their fur helped to absorb some of the
gas, for five hours later the little victims were almost themselves
again, though they continued to cough occasionally and drank water
continually. The water they took in preference to milk.

The effects of the poison on the soldiers who were gassed were pretty
much the same as has been so frequently described in the press before.
In the lighter cases it was mostly severe and painful coughing and
bronchitis, with occasional retching and vomiting. The severe cases
had the frothing at the mouth, the painful fight for breath and the
blue face with staring eyes which are typical of severe gassing with
chlorine and phosgene. I was told that there were not many delayed
cases--that is, men being taken seriously ill hours after the attack,
though apparently unscathed before.

The casualties were really remarkably small in the circumstances, and
even despite the surprise tactics, were not as numerous as those of
the December attack. Apart from the men who were caught without their
respirators, most of the casualties were the result of some special
circumstances. The helmets themselves when properly inspected and
adjusted gave good protection. In connection with the laying aside of
the respirators after the first cloud a sergeant told me that when the
second wave came over he had seen two soldiers trying to get into the
same helmet. The humorous side of this had apparently appealed to him
even in the middle of the attack.

Of course with the trenches so close together a lot of men had
difficulty in getting protection in time. Parties of men in advanced
saps and listening posts had the greatest difficulty, and numbers
of these men were killed. One pioneer of a tunnelling company came
out of a mine gallery knowing nothing about what had been happening
aboveground, and walked straight into the middle of the gas cloud.

A man in one of the companies of the Irish Rifles was wounded in the
head by shrapnel through both his steel and gas helmets. In spite of
the wound and the hole in his gas helmet he held the latter close round
his mouth and nose and was not gassed at all--a clear case of presence
of mind saving his life.

One thing which impressed every one with the need for thorough gas
training at home, and which should be taken to heart by all men in
training at the camps or likely to go there, was the way in which
reinforcements and men who had recently joined up suffered. Their
casualties were out of all proportion to their numbers and were due
entirely to the fact that insufficient attention was given at that time
to the gas-defence training of the recruits. Many of them had never put
on a helmet before, and none of them had ever smelled gas.

In one particular instance a batch of twenty men had come straight over
from England and were in the gas attack the day after their arrival in
the trenches. The only training they had had was a lecture from their
own regimental officers, and consequently they knew little or nothing
about the use of their helmets. Every one of these men was gassed. It
is true that they had scrambled into their helmets somehow, and none
of them died; but the fact remains that absence of training at home
cost the fighting line twenty men in one company. In this company they
were the only men gassed. Largely as a consequence of this, gas-defence
training was taken up very seriously in the early training of recruits,
and big gas schools were established at all the camps both in England
and at the bases in France, so as to catch the young soldier early.

The boche made another gas attack on the Irish Division on the same
Front two days later. Once again he let off two waves--this time with
an interval of only a quarter of an hour. But despite his idea of
“mixing them up” he could not bring off that particular surprise again.

The second attack was one of the most interesting on record, for it
was here, near Hulluch, that the gas blew back on the Germans and
killed many more of them than our total gas casualties. The thing
happened in this way: The first gas wave was loosed off at three-fifty
A. M., opposite the celebrated Chalk Pit Wood. Fifteen minutes later a
heavy cloud was discharged on the Hulluch front. But the wind was too
light and variable. The cloud came over our line and then the gentle
wind first dropped altogether and then gradually veered round. The
gas hung on No Man’s Land and over both sets of trenches for a short
time, and then with increasing pace drifted back right over the German
position, just where Fritz had been seen massing for an attack on the
Hulluch sector. We did not see the confusion which reigned, but almost
simultaneously with the arrival of his own gas our barrage came down
and the German attack dispersed.

All that day our observers reported the carrying out of German
casualties from the trenches on stretchers and a constant stream of
ambulances coming up and then returning along the roads to the rear. We
surmised that the boche had swallowed some of his own poison, but it
was not until several months later, from some documents captured during
the Battle of the Somme, that we were able to appreciate his disaster
to the full.

The first of these documents was the diary of a soldier who had been in
the neighbouring trenches. It ran: “... We went along the trenches to
find the headquarters of the ----th. It was awful. Everywhere lay dead
bodies or men gasping for breath and dying from the gas. Somebody must
be to blame. At first I could not go on. One almost had to step on them
to get through. I asked an officer of the ----th what had happened.
They were going to be relieved....”

But the other documents were more explicit, as they happened to be the
official report on the matter from the war office in Berlin. It appears
that the Germans had eleven hundred deaths from their own gas. A most
rigid enquiry was held and it was found that many of the men were not
carrying respirators, either in the trenches or in the area immediately
behind the line. But this did not explain the extent of the disaster,
so eight hundred of the respirators collected from casualties were sent
to Berlin for examination and report. Even allowing for those which
might have been injured in transit, there were still thirty-three per
cent of the masks so defective that their owners were certain to be
gassed. To see whether this applied only to the area affected a large
number of respirators were collected from up and down the whole Western
Front, and it was found that even among those as many as eleven and a
half per cent were similarly at fault. It would seem that there had
been very poor inspection of the respirators both in manufacture and
after issue to the troops. Apart from the joy of seeing the boche hoist
with his own petard it was rather a relief to find that the efficient
German Army was not so frightfully efficient after all.

This matter of inspection is taken very seriously in the British Army.
Besides the rigorous factory inspection all respirators are inspected
thoroughly every day even in the trenches, and Tommy is expected to
look after his respirator just as he looks after his rifle. As an
official statement issued after the April attack said: “A defective
helmet frequently leads to the death of the wearer. Inspection of
respirators must be frequent and thorough.” A sergeant who was
notorious for his thorough dealing with recruits got away with it in
even better terms when addressing a squad on parade. In thundering
tones he said: “If you don’t look for the ’oles in your ’elmet, they’ll
soon be looking for a ’ole for you.”

Another thing that resulted from the attacks just described, and
from another similar attack shortly afterward in the salient, was
the putting on the screw with regard to the carrying of respirators
continuously by every one in the trenches. A very good and well-known
story on the British Army in this connection is that of a brigadier
general who was proceeding to the line for his daily inspection when he
discovered that he was minus a gas bag. He stopped the first orderly
he saw, borrowed the man’s helmet and serenely went his way with a
clear conscience. Arrived in the trenches, one of the first sights that
met his horrified gaze was a soldier without a gas mask. In virtuous
tones he demanded the reason for its absence, and then, waving aside
the halting explanation, went on loudly to assert his belief that the
soldier would not know how to use a respirator even if he had one.

“Here,” he said, “take mine and show me whether you can put it on in
quick time.”

The awe-stricken Tommy slung the satchel over his shoulder, and on the
word “Gas!” from the general thrust his hand into the haversack and
pulled out--a very dirty pair of army socks.

The fourth German attack of 1916 was made on June seventeenth in
Flanders, near Messines; in fact, just north of the Wulverghem-Messines
road. Like those of April, it was intensely strong, very short, and
sent over in successive waves at intervals of about twenty minutes.
There were really no fresh features about the show, but the cloud seems
to have been even stronger than before. I had no personal experience of
this attack, but the cloud must have been very strong, for it killed
animals at “Plugstreet”--the only name we used in the British Army
for Ploegsteert--three and half miles away, and was quite distinctly
perceptible even at Béthune. At the “Piggeries”--the remains of a
model farm in rear of Plugstreet Wood belonging to a notable French
sportsman, a place well-known to so many British soldiers--a calf was
found dead, after the passage of the cloud, with the body very much
blown out. Dead rats lay in close proximity.

Even farther back than this animals were seriously affected. The
army mules in the line of the gas were seized with fits of coughing
and kicked violently, making them even more difficult to handle than
usual. It is probably not realised that horse masks are now issued on
a scale sufficient to provide protection for all horses and mules,
such as those of the first-line transport and the artillery, which
have to approach anywhere near the lines. The present form of these
respirators is that of a big bag soaked in chemicals which fits over
the animal’s nostrils, leaving its mouth free so that the use of the
bit is not interfered with. When not in use the horse respirator folds
up very nicely and neatly into a canvas case which can be carried on
the breastband of the harness or any place from which it can be quickly
adjusted. Some of the animals take to these masks--“Horspirators,”
some wag called them--quite quickly, but others are strenuous
objectors; some of those hardened sinners, the mules, transforming
themselves into masses of teeth and hoofs whenever an attempt is made
to fix on the gas bags.

In one case where a horse and a mule in the same supply column were
fitted with their masks at the same time the difference was most
marked. The horse was dressed up without much trouble, though he did
not like it. He whinnied and sneezed, breathed hard and perspired
and looked rather pitiable, but stuck it out. The mule, on the other
hand, had to be roped to get the mask on at all. Then he danced about,
heels in the air and head down, and tried to rub off the objectionable
appendage against the rope, and then against a tree. This did not
effect its removal, and for a minute the cunning animal stood still
with his ears cocked at different angles. Then suddenly he put his
head to the ground and before anything could be done to prevent it put
his foot on the respirator, pulled his head up smartly and left the
respirator under his hoof.

These masks have proved of the greatest value and have saved any
number of horses’ lives. The cavalry are not provided with them, as
it is not anticipated that they will be near enough to be affected by
gas-cloud attacks, and when the cavalry are mounted and in action it is
unlikely that they will meet even poison-gas shells in large numbers.
Added to this is the fact that a horse can stand more gas than a man
without being distressed.

The casualties in the June attack were lower than in any one
previously. Indeed, it was a satisfactory feature of the whole gas
business that despite the increasing deadliness of the German clouds
the losses they caused became less and less. Of course the proportion
of severe cases in those gassed became greater, for with such strong
clouds it had become a case of hit or miss. Either a man was protected
completely or he was caught out badly; and this spoke well for the
protection supplied, for otherwise there would have been a much bigger
proportion of light cases.

Of the minor effects of these boche gas clouds, that on vegetation is
the most marked and gives a good idea of the strength of the gas. For
miles in the track of the cloud all green stuff is burned up or wilted.
Grass is turned yellow, the leaves of trees go brown and fall off, and
the garden crops are entirely destroyed. I have seen root crops in the
fields and garden crops of onions, beans and lettuce quite destroyed.
But curiously enough, farther back, in places where this still happens
to the garden crops, the cereals and the hedges seem to escape serious
injury.

Of course over a wide area all metal work is thickly tarnished, and
this might be a danger in the case of telephone instruments and other
delicate appliances, except that the exposed parts are always kept
slightly oiled and then cleaned thoroughly after the attack. The same
thing is done with rifles and machine guns and their ammunition, and
with the clinometres, fuses and breech mechanism of guns and trench
mortars. Since this war started very little difficulty has occurred
through corrosion, but the chief thing is to clean off the grease and
reoil all metal parts exposed to the gas immediately after the attack
is finished, otherwise the greasy surface seems to hold the gas or the
acid it engenders, and allows it to eat in at its leisure.

During the attacks of 1916 the alarm arrangements worked very well,
and the Strombos Horns in particular justified their use. Even above
the noise of machine-gun fire and the bursting of shells their shrill,
unmistakable note could be heard for long distances, giving warning to
all troops on the flanks and in the rear. There were very few instances
where they were not let off in time and the sentries posted over them
apparently knew their jobs better, for instance, than one man who
was questioned on the subject. This particular sentry was asked by a
noncommissioned officer going the rounds in the trenches what he would
do in the event of a gas attack being made. “Oh,” replied the bright
boy, “that’s easy. If any gas comes over it blows the horn and I call
the platoon sergeant and tell him about it.”

A much more conscientious sentry over a Strombos Horn had been told to
be particularly on the lookout for a gas attack, as one was expected
at any time. The officer on duty, going round about midnight, heard
a suspiciously regular sound coming from one of the fire bays, and
thinking that one of the sentries was indulging in a stolen forty winks
he cautiously rounded the traverse. Here he found the sentry lying
on the top of the parapet staring into the darkness and going sniff,
sniff, sniff with his nose.

Being asked more forcibly than politely what was the matter with him
the man replied: “I’m sniffing for gas.”

Sniff, sniff, sniff.

“Can you smell any?”

“No, sir; but I want to smell it if it does come, as I’m a gas sentry
and the leftenant told me always to keep smelling for gas.”

Sniff, sniff, sniff.

The job of seeing that the air cylinders of the Strombos Horns are
kept at their full pressure is intrusted to the divisional gas
noncommissioned officers, who go round periodically with pressure
gauges and test them out. If they fall below a certain pressure they
are replaced at once by fresh ones from the divisional store. Some
Australians going up the line one night were carrying a number of such
cylinders for replacement, when one of them got turned on accidentally
and they didn’t seem able to stop it.

A passing officer hearing the hissing noise called out: “What have you
got there?”

“Air bottles,” was the answer.

“What for?” persisted the officer.

A pause, and then out of the darkness: “Oh, hell! To put the wind up
the boche, of course.”

This story will probably be appreciated more by Britishers than
Americans, though I think the latter in many cases already know the
significance of the expressions “getting the wind up” and “putting the
wind up.” They refer of course to what official reports or newspaper
men would style as “reduction of morale.”




CHAPTER VI

  The last German gas cloud sent over August, 1916--Its
    intensity--“Delayed” gases of phosgene gassing--Cigarettes as a test
    of gassing--Dangers of carelessness--The sprayer abandoned for Mrs.
    Ayrton’s fan--Responsibilities of the divisional gas office--Russian
    gas victims--The day of the gas cloud over.


The last German gas cloud to be discharged against the British Front
was in August, 1916. In every way it was the greatest test to which our
men had been put. It was the strongest cloud attack the Germans had
made--not only were the individual waves of only ten minutes’ duration
but the boche had more cylinders in his line than usual. According to
his own admissions the bottles were put in at the rate of three every
two yards and in some places two per yard. Added to this he had brought
up the proportion of phosgene to the maximum that can be used. The
circumstances, too, were very unfavourable to us. It must be remembered
that the Battle of the Somme was in full swing, and that for once in
its war history the Ypres salient, where the gas attack took place,
was a “quiet” sector where divisions used up in the battle went to
“rest” and reorganise. The result was that the divisions attacked were
composed very largely of fresh drafts. They had lost very heavily in
officers and most of the company noncommissioned gas officers had been
knocked out. Their gas training was therefore not at the high standard
that it had attained previous to the battle.

Added to this, a relief was going on in the trenches. This, by the way,
was the second time that our fellows were caught by a gas attack during
a relief. Whether it was that the boche intelligence was particularly
good or whether it was simply that his luck was in is not certain, but
it meant that our trenches, both the front line and the communication
trenches, had just twice the number of men in them that they would have
had normally. And every man, both incoming and outgoing, was carrying
his complete “Christmas Tree” rig--rifle, ammunition, full pack,
haversack, greatcoat, gas masks, and all the rest of it; in some places
hardly able to squeeze through the trenches in his bulky marching
equipment.

Into this congestion the boche let off his gas on the eighth of August
about ten o’clock P. M. It says worlds for the steadiness of our
fellows that the total casualties from the three waves he sent over
remained at the same low ebb that they had reached in the June attack.
Of course but for the adverse circumstances they would undoubtedly have
been still lower. It is interesting to note that the position on which
the attack was made--namely, the line between Bellewarde Lake and the
Yser Canal--included much of the line over which the first attack of
all had been made a year and a half previously.

The intensity of the cloud can be realised from the fact that helmets
had to be worn at a division headquarters nine miles from the point of
discharge, and the gas was perceptible, though not so dangerous, many
miles beyond this point.

The most distinctive feature of the whole affair was the number of men
who suffered from the delayed action of the phosgene and collapsed
several hours after the attack, especially if they had taken any
exercise or eaten a heavy meal in between. The latter is not very
likely, though it does occur, for a man even slightly gassed with
phosgene feels very depressed--“fed up” and not particularly inclined
for a hearty meal. But the getting of the exercise is only too easy,
what with the necessary work in the trenches and the possible walk back
to the aid post or the march back to rest billets in the event of a
relief. It was men who had done this kind of thing who suffered most.

After the attack we received official orders that no man suffering
from the effects of the gas should be allowed to walk to the dressing
station, and that if possible after a gas attack troops in the front
trenches should be relieved of all fatigue and carrying work for
twenty-four hours. It was also ordered that during the passage of the
gas all movement should be reduced to a minimum and there should be
as little talking as possible. These were very wise orders, for there
had been too many officers and noncommissioned officers gassed through
moving up and down to control the positions of their men and from
shouting orders through their helmets. A certain amount of talking
is necessary, of course, but too much of it makes a man breathe more
deeply and may be just the added strain sufficient to affect his heart
and cause his collapse.

Of course after a gas attack there are always a certain number of
malingerers--“Skrimshankers,” as we call them--who affect to be gassed
in order to get away from the line for a bit. These are generally
spotted easily enough by the doctor men. One medical officer I knew,
harassed by the number of slightly “gassed” cases who would have to
be evacuated, and suspicious about the genuine character of some of
them, handed round cigarettes. All those who accepted and smoked their
cigarettes were kept back. Later examination showed that he was right
in every case.

A similar instance that I heard of, this time in a practice attack in
a camp in England, concerned a very poor specimen who pretended to be
badly gassed. He was taken to the orderly room on a stretcher; but
unfortunately for him the medical corps sergeant recognised him as a
man who had fallen out during a march a short time before, and knew all
about him.

Meantime the man was feigning unconsciousness, but the sergeant winked
at the medical officer and said: “It’s a pity that order about sick
leave prevents men from going home in a case like this unless they live
in London. What this poor fellow needs is a couple of weeks in his own
home.”

The corpse thereupon sat up and said: “That’s all right, sir. I live in
Bow. When can I go?”

As in all the previous attacks an analysis of the casualties showed
that where the helmets had been kept in good condition and had been
used properly and in time they had given perfect protection. The
casualties were all due to preventable causes--some of them lamentable,
others humorous, had it not been for their tragedy.

Many men were gassed through taking off their helmets too soon. It
is really up to the officers and noncommissioned officers who have
attended a course at a gas school to decide when the atmosphere is
safe, and it is not nearly so risky to do this as it sounds. All that
is necessary is to let a little air in from the outside by cautiously
opening up the face piece of the mask--or the skirt of the helmet in
the case of the old gas bag--and sniffing cautiously. Of course if it
is not done cautiously and there happens to be a lot of gas about, the
rash man suffers.

A number of men were gassed through going into unprotected dugouts
before they had been ventilated or through wandering into pockets of
the gas after the attack. They should have been on the lookout for
these patches, as the gas notoriously keeps close to the ground at
night, and sheltered places are bound to remain unhealthy for much
longer periods than the open. It is curious that by some vagary of the
wind the cloud farther back hopped over some houses that were used
as billets and affected neither the inhabitants nor the unprotected
animals on the ground, whereas some fowls that were roosting in the
trees and on the tops of the houses were killed.

One instance that shows how carelessness spells casualty in gas warfare
was that of a working party of thirty or forty men who were busy on
railway work a mile or two behind the line. They had taken off their
coats and gas helmets and placed them on some trucks, but when the
alarm was given and a rush was made for the helmets the trucks were
found to have gone.

One thing that was done after the August attack was definitely and
finally to withdraw the Vermorel sprayers for use for clearing the gas
out of the trenches and dugouts. These instruments, brought up for the
work of spraying fruit trees and vineyards, had done some first-class
fighting of the German gas, right in the front line, as long as the gas
was chlorine. But with the introduction of large quantities of phosgene
the work of the sprayers was gone. They could not touch the phosgene,
and consequently Tommy’s dependence on them was a snare and made things
more dangerous for him than if they had not been used at all. For a
dugout might be sprayed and thought, therefore, to be quite healthy to
sleep in and yet contain as much phosgene as would at any rate cause
minor and delayed effects.

To clear out the gas recourse was had to ventilation by means of fires
and by specially constructed canvas fans.

These fans were the invention of an English lady named Ayrton--the
widow of the physicist of that name--and were originally intended by
her for fanning back the gas cloud to the German trenches. Of course
they were quite incapable of doing any such thing, but during trials
with them it was found that they were quite good, after an attack,
for fanning the gas out of the trenches or creating such a draft of
air into a dugout or cellar as to force out the impure air from the
interior.

These anti-gas fans, or flapper fans as they were called, are made of
canvas supported by braces of cane and attached to a hickory handle
about two feet long. The blade of the fan, which looks like an immense
fly swat, is hinged in two places and measures about fifteen inches
square. When the fan is brought down on the ground it bends over on the
back hinge and produces a sharp puff of air, in just the same way that
the sudden shutting of an open book does.

By working the fans in series, one man behind another, it is possible
to keep a current of air going which will ventilate a room or clear
out a trench in remarkably quick time. In clearing out a trench the
fan is brought back over the shoulder, and this helps to “shovel” the
contaminated air out of the trench after it has been brought off the
ground by the lower stroke, which is more like a smart slap.

These fans are kept as trench stores, which means that they are handed
over on relief to the incoming unit taking over the line of trenches.
They have proved very useful, especially in skilful hands their chief
value being that, unlike the sprayers, they do not distinguish between
different kinds of gases and they will deal as unceremoniously with
tear gas and phosgene as they do with chlorine.

By the time of the last gas-cloud attack the organisation of the
British Army for defence against gas had been brought to a pretty high
state of efficiency. A special branch of the gas service had been
detailed for the purpose and special gas officers were appointed to the
staffs of the various formations, from army down to division.

The position of divisional gas officer is no sinecure. Besides having
the job of screwing up the gas discipline of his division and having
a general oversight of all gas-defence training and supplies, he is
responsible to the divisional commander for the preparedness of the
line to meet a German gas attack. He is the “intelligence” officer of
his general as regards all things pertaining to gas and has to be a
walking dictionary on the subject. He has to be a great part of his
time in the front trenches and it is up to him to see that all enemy
blind shells, and so on, are examined and brought in if they seem to
be anything new. As he must deal direct with the battalion commanders
he must know them and the senior officers of each regiment personally,
so as to smooth the way in getting things done. Then if a gas attack
or bombardment is made he must get there quick, so as to find out all
about it from personal experience.

Altogether he is a very important and busy person, and to those
acquainted with his work the following incident will appeal. I happened
to overhear part of a conversation between two Cockney Tommies on the
road:

“What’s this ’ere divisional gas officer, Bill?”

“Why, he’s the bloke what goes round and blows up these observation
balloons.”

The divisional gas officer has a number of specially trained
noncommissioned officers to help him, and each company of infantry and
battery of artillery has at least one noncommissioned officer. It is
the first and most important job of these noncommissioned officers to
help the commander in everything pertaining to defence against German
gas. He assists at drills and inspections, help in the arrangement
and fitting up of alarms, in the taking of wind readings and the
protection of the shelters and dugouts. In his charge are placed the
gas fans and the sampling apparatus. A good company gas noncommissioned
officer is a real joy and can polish up the gas discipline of the
company tremendously, as well as take a lot of responsibility off the
overworked company commander’s shoulders. A bad noncommissioned gas
officer, on the other hand, can be the direct and indirect cause of the
loss of many lives when the gas attack does come.

This ended the British experience of German gas-cloud attacks, for
though the 35th and 36th Pioneers made three subsequent visits to the
Western Front it was each time to gas the French. The last cloud attack
of all was made near Nieuport, at that time in the French lines, on
April 23, 1917.

Since then the only cloud attacks have been made against the Russians
and the Italians.

Probably the chief reason that has caused the boche to hold back with
his cloud attacks has been his conclusion that they were unprofitable
against well-disciplined, highly trained and thoroughly protected
troops. With a limited amount of gas available he naturally chose the
method that would give him the best results. For the cloud attack
his cheapest target was the Russians, who were incompletely equipped
with gas masks of a modern kind and who for a long time were badly
disciplined in anti-gas measures. Against such troops the gas cloud
is just the thing, and the Germans have estimated that ten to fifteen
per cent of all troops exposed to a successful gas cloud would become
casualties. This was probably true on the Russian Front, but was
certainly not true in the West.

Then the gas cloud has almost reached its apparent limit of
development. There is a limit to the number of gases that can be used
from cylinders, and there is a limit to the number of cylinders that
can be discharged at one time. Besides this the gas cloud is largely
dependent on infantry labour for carrying and installation, and it is
mighty difficult to bring off a complete surprise owing to the time it
takes to prepare an attack.

On top of all this the whole procedure is wrong as regards efficiency,
for it puts up the highest concentration of gas where the boche does
not want it--just in front of his own trenches instead of in ours.

For all these reasons the boche during the past year has specialised on
the development of his gas shells. Of course he may come back with the
cloud again, and we do not relax our vigilance or it certainly would
reappear. But unless he discovers something new in the cloud line, and
if we keep up a high standard of training, he will not do much damage,
though for that matter the same thing is true about gas shells and
trench mortar bombs.




CHAPTER VII

  The rising importance of the gas shell--The variety of gases
    practicable with the shell--The deadly Green Cross Shell--Risks
    of transporting “duds” for chemical analysis--Reduced Allied
    casualties--German blunders in shelling tactics--Importance of
    universal discipline.


One of the most interesting things about the development of gas warfare
has been the way in which the gas shell, from being the least important
method of poisoning the air, has become the chief gas weapon in the
German armoury.

The reasons for this extraordinary development, though various, are not
far to seek. They lie chiefly in the fact that unlike the gas cloud we
have not even yet approached the limit of the number or size of the gas
projectiles that can be used. Nor, which is even more important, is
there any limit to the variety of the poisons that can be used in gas
shell.

The fact of the matter is that the gas shell is not really a gas
shell at all. It is nearly always a “liquid” shell and sometimes even
a “solid” shell. The term “gas shell” is used because the liquid or
solid contents are atomised by the explosion of the bursting charge or
are distributed round in the form of such tiny particles or droplets,
as the case may be, that they act almost as a gas. In the latter
case they form what might be described as a mist or smoke, but with
this difference from ordinary smoke--that the gas mist or smoke is
generally, though not always, invisible.

Just imagine what would happen supposing a shell were filled with
water. Burst such a shell with a sufficiently big charge of high
explosive and all the water would be distributed into the air in the
form of such finely divided spray that it would form a mist. This mist
would either vapourise into the atmosphere completely or hang about
like a cloud, according as the air was dry or moist. In any case, if
the burster were big enough no water would be spread on the ground; nor
would any big drops be formed.

This is just what happens with any of the poisonous materials filled
into a shell. Indeed if the burster were big enough and carefully
chosen it would be possible to form a “gas” with treacle. With a
volatile material like gasoline on the other hand all that would be
needed would be a burster just big enough to open the shell.

It can be seen therefore that the choice of materials for gas shell is
practically unlimited and is governed only by their being poisonous
enough and by the ease of production.

Another thing in which the gas shell has the advantage over the
cylinder gas is in getting surprise, which is naturally much easier
to effect with shell. By the way, if the reader wishes to be counted
among those who knows, he will always speak or write the plural of
shell without adding a final “s.” To talk of a number of shells is very
civilian.

As I pointed out before, we were expecting something new to happen in
the gas-shell line during the whole of 1916, and had an idea that the
new arrival would be something of a cyanide nature--possibly prussic
acid itself. When it did come, however, it proved to be a liquid
filling closely related chemically to phosgene and to the K-Stoff,
which I have previously described. These new gas shell were the first
of the present series of German gas shell, which are all distinctly
marked with coloured crosses and named accordingly. These particular
shell were the Green Cross Shell, a green cross being painted on the
base of the cartridge or on the side of the shell or sometimes on both.
They made their appearance on the Somme Front about a fortnight after
the battle had started--that is, about the middle of July, 1916--though
a few of them had been used against the French on the Verdun Front
sometime in June.

It was not long before blind or unexploded shell--“duds,” we call
them--were collected and sent back for examination. This is one of the
disadvantages of using gas shell--your opponent can always keep track
of what you are doing. Sooner or later a fuse will not function or a
bursting charge will not explode and your watchful enemy carefully
collects the shell, and has for examination a considerable amount
of the poison material. I say “carefully collects,” for it is no
child’s play dealing with shell which may go off in your hands on the
slightest provocation. However, it has to be done, and as it is the
gas officer’s pidgin he manfully shoulders his task and the shell and
has it brought in. Very frequently the fuse fails to act because a
powder pellet holding up the striking needle has not burned away; but
I remember one case where the gas officer of one of the armies took
back a big dud gas shell. It meant transporting the weighty souvenir
in a not particularly well sprung car over very bumpy roads, and he
was quite relieved to arrive at his destination--the field laboratory.
Here it was reverently taken to bits by the experts. Imagine the gas
officer’s horror to find he had been bumping along for several hours in
the company of a shell the powder pellet of which had burned away and
whose only safety device was the weakest of weak creep springs on which
the striker rested. A hard knock or a drop of six inches would almost
certainly have exploded it.

The laboratory officers, who are experts at the game, may have to go up
to the Front themselves to solve important duds which are regarded as
dangerous and require expert attention. In one instance the officer
concerned--in civil life a very celebrated professor at one of the
London colleges--went up to the salient and explored about a mile and
a half of trenches and finally located his prey--a fine dud 4.2-inch
howitzer gas shell--out in the open.

Though the place was pretty unhealthy he “climbed the bags” and made a
careful examination of the shell where it lay, finally bringing it back
in with him. I forget whether he drew its sting on the spot, but in any
case it was a pretty good effort, especially for a man no longer in his
first youth.

Chemical analysis of the blind Green Cross Shell showed the contents
to be a colourless liquid known to chemists by the extensive name of
“trichlormethylcholoroformate.” Its effects are just as ferocious
as the name implies, and experience showed it to be very poisonous.
Indeed it is as poisonous as phosgene itself. The Green Cross Shell
gas--“diphosgene,” to give it its short name--has many effects and
symptoms that make it a dangerous weapon. When dilute it has a peculiar
though not particularly nauseating smell, a smell variously described
as “earthy,” “mouldy rhubarb”--whatever that smells like--and damp hay.
Unlike the shell gases we had encountered before, it has very little
effect on the eyes and causes practically no lachrymation. And this
was a trap, because we had been used to lachrymators, so that many men
despite the obvious smell were not particularly quick in protecting
themselves because of the new symptoms.

Of course this applies only to such low concentrations as would take a
long time to gas a man. In the higher concentrations the Green Cross
very quickly asphyxiates--just as phosgene and chlorine do--and there
is no question of whether it is deadly or not. The old Army quip about
there being only two kinds of people in gas warfare, namely “The
Quick and the Dead,” certainly applies if you get a Green Cross Shell
bursting close to you. But even for gas shell bursting some distance
away immediate and complete protection is necessary because of the
delayed or after effects of the gas, which are exactly similar to those
of phosgene. Every care that is taken with regard to men poisoned with
phosgene has to be taken for men poisoned with Green Cross gas.

Those suffering from the effects of the gas are not allowed to exert
themselves at all or to take heavy meals. They are kept under close
observation for at least two days, and are treated, in fact, as
casualties even though they are not apparently ill. Before the need
for this was understood an officer I knew was slightly gassed with
shell gas but thought nothing of it. Later on he felt a bit queer,
and the regimental medical officer advised him to go down to the
dressing station. He walked the length of the communication trench and
then mounted a “push bicycle” for a mile’s ride to the aid post. The
exertion was too much, however, and he reached the aid post only to
fall dead.

The danger of not treating gassed men as casualties and resting them
for a couple of days, after which they would probably be fit for work
again, is shown by a case where forty men were lost to the line for
a considerable time, though fortunately none of them died. These men
were part of a working party engaged in the construction of dugouts.
They were caught in a surprise bombardment, but were apparently not
much affected. After completing their night’s work they marched back
to billets and turned in as usual. The next morning several of them
were so ill--nearly to the point of collapse--and the remainder were so
visibly affected that the medical officer ordered the whole party to be
sent down to the casualty clearing station, where they were evacuated
to the base.

In still another case I remember a sergeant and twenty men of a wiring
party engaged in the consolidation of a recently captured position
were similarly caught by a sudden and intense Green Cross bombardment.
A number of the men were gassed and felt pretty seedy, but continued
their work and then withdrew. The sergeant felt no ill effects until
an hour after turning in, when he woke with a bad cough and internal
pain and died two hours afterward. One private went to bed without
complaining at all and was found dead next morning. Another died soon
after getting up. A third reached headquarters complaining of shell
shock and died three hours later. I mention these cases so that my
reader will realise why such great care is now taken with men who have
been exposed to poison gas, and how by looking after them in this way
it has been possible to reduce the number of delayed cases of death or
serious illness to a minimum.

Talking of delayed effects of gas shell reminds me that at least
two documents were captured during the Somme--one of them I got
myself--which were obviously notes of lectures given to officers at
a German gas school or staff course. In both of these sets of notes
there were references to the Lusitania, showing that the German Higher
Command was trying to explain that dastardly act to its own troops by
making out that the Lusitania was sunk because it was carrying phosgene
shell for the Allies. This lie can easily be nailed to the board, as
not a single drop of phosgene--or any other poison gas or liquid, for
that matter--was shipped from America before this year, 1918. Both
of the paragraphs I refer to contained a double lie, for they each
asserted that the French started the use of gas shell. One of them
ran as follows: “The French first started the use of gas shell--with
great hopes, but with little success! The most striking result was that
experienced by the passengers of the Lusitania, whose rescued mostly
died later.”

But to return to the Green Cross Shell. These were used during the
Somme Battle in enormous numbers, far surpassing anything we had had
before in the extent of the bombardment. There were a great many new
features about these shell quite apart from the altered nature of the
gas. First of all there was the size. Until then we had had gas shell
of only two sizes--150-millimetre howitzer shell and the 105-millimetre
howitzer shell. The former contained from five to eight pints of liquid
according to the construction of the shell, and the latter about three
pints. To these longer shell were now added shell from the ordinary
field gun, or 77-millimetre gun--quite a small affair compared with the
others and containing only two-thirds of a pint of liquid poison. But
then, though so small, it could be fired more rapidly and accurately
and could bring off an initial surprise in a way that the bigger guns
could not do.

Shell of these three sizes were used then on nearly all occasions and
in very large quantities. One thing that made large numbers possible
was the simplicity of the shell compared with the old pattern. There
was no separate lead container and the “gas” was filled straight into
the body of the shell, as the new material was unacted on by iron or
steel. The head of the shell was screwed in and kept in position and
perfectly gas-tight by means of a special cement.

As very little explosive was needed to open them up and spread the
contents round the noise made by the burst of the Green Cross Shell
was little more than a pop--at any rate when compared with the
high-explosive shell or the old tear shell. The result was that at
first men were apt to regard them as duds and to delay the putting on
of respirators until it was too late.

These gas shell are supposed to make a peculiar wobbling noise in the
passage through the air because of the liquid inside them, and in
this way to be recognisable beforehand. Personally I cannot tell any
difference in the noise compared with H. E. or shrapnel of the same
calibre, though I have heard thousands of both kinds; but I dare say
some people can, as the belief is fairly widespread.

Of course Fritz’s liberality with his gas shell caused us a lot of
casualties, but not nearly so many as we might have had if he had known
how to use them. The fact was he had not at that time got hold of the
proper technic--developed later on by the French--of concentrating his
gas shell on special targets. By now, of course, he has; but at that
time he still clung to the idea of being able to poison big areas with
his shell gas by putting down a series of barrages over the country
to be attacked. Either he had not enough shell or he chose his areas
too big, for he did not produce effective concentrations anywhere but
locally. If he had, our losses might have been tremendous. As it was it
became rather a hit-or-miss proposition, and I have seen hundreds and
hundreds of these shell drop into absolutely unpopulated areas of the
devastated Somme battlefield.

In one case a battery of field guns came in for its share of one such
promiscuous bombardment while I was there. The number of shell coming
over was so great that it was like a magnified machine-gun shoot, but
only a very few got on to the battery and the casualties were only
two--both caused by a direct hit on one of the guns by a gas shell.
If the boche had been able to concentrate his shell on and round the
battery instead of giving it just the same amount as the unoccupied
surrounding country the effect might have been very different.

One possible reason for the promiscuous and sometimes very casual
shooting may have been the fact that the boche at that time had
practically no air observation. Our flying fellows had temporarily
chased his planes out of the skies and had shot down all his
observation balloons. This made it impossible for him to pick his
targets, and he either had to bombard the countryside or shoot “by the
map,” neither method being particularly conducive to good results with
gas shell.

On the other hand, one or two places that he knew were pretty certain
to be occupied by our troops were given their full dose. One such
place was Caterpillar Wood--a big narrow spinney running off from the
Fricourt Valley and so named because of its shape and the fact that on
the ordnance maps, on which the woods are colored green, it looks just
like a green caterpillar crawling over to the shelter of Mametz Wood.
This place was continually shelled with large numbers of the Green
Cross Shell, and as it stood in the side of a valley the gas persisted
longer there than elsewhere and built up a tidy concentration which
caused a lot of trouble.

The gunners were among our chief sufferers from these gas shell, as
their guns were so frequently placed in sunken roads and folds in the
ground for protection against explosive shell and aërial observation,
and these were just the kind of places that held the gas longest. In
the open much less damage was done. I remember one night the first-line
transport of a battalion of the Black Watch ran into a patch of country
into which the boche was raining 77-millimetre Green Cross Shell, and
came out with only three casualties, two of which were from a direct
hit on one of the wagons, the driver being killed instantly.

It seems particularly bad luck to be killed by a direct hit from a
gas shell, for the bits of shell that fly about don’t do much damage
in the ordinary way and don’t travel great distances. Indeed it is
remarkable, even in the biggest gas-shell bombardments, how very few
men are hurt by the fragments.

The first week or two after the advent of the Green Cross the toll of
gas-shell casualties was considerable if not alarming, but steps were
immediately taken to get the situation in hand. It is in a case like
this, where a surprise had been brought off, that Discipline, with a
very big “D,” counts for so much. Fortunately the gas discipline of
the British Army was pretty good, and it was not difficult to get new
instructions carried out and orders obeyed. Once they got going their
effect was most apparent and the gas-shell casualties dropped from week
to week until they approached a minimum.

Among the important steps that were taken were a revision of the
methods of spreading the alarm, and the protection and clearing out of
dugouts into which the gas had penetrated.

Mention has already been made of the slight noise caused by the
explosion of the gas shell, and instructions were accordingly issued
that all shell that sounded like duds were to be regarded as gas shell,
and the respirators adjusted accordingly. This got over one of the
elements of surprise.

A great many men, especially those in battery positions, had been
gassed in their dugouts before warning of the gas bombardment had
been spread. Numbers of these men were actually gassed in their sleep
and were awakened too late by the choking fumes themselves. What was
done was to post a gas sentry at every battery in just the same way
that it was done in the trenches. Special local-alarm signals were
arranged so that the sentry could wake every one in the neighbourhood
without having the alarm spread beyond the limit of the gassed area.
These alarms generally took the form of bells or of gongs made from
big shell cases; but later on policemen’s large rattles were found to
be the most effective “weapon” for the purpose, and numbers of these
were distributed up and down the line and in the battery positions. It
was feared at first that the noise of the rattles would be mistaken
for machine-gun fire and no attention be paid to it, but this did not
materialise and the rattles have done good service.

The only thing about them is that they are made of wood--and nicely
pickled, easily burning wood at that. In the trenches kindling chips of
any kind are eagerly sought after to make a miniature fire to warm tea
or cook an egg. When men will go the length of shaving the handles of
their entrenching tools to obtain dry wood it could hardly be expected
that policemen’s rattles would always be respected. I am afraid a
number of them disappeared. With the artillery things are not so bad as
fuel is easier to obtain and the rattles are therefore less liable to
get lost.




CHAPTER VIII

  The gas-proof dugout--First-aid methods of alarm--Von Buelow
    improves German gas tactics--Popular errors about gas--Effectiveness
    of new British respirators--Vomiting gas--Germans speed up their
    manufacture--Gas as a neutraliser of artillery fire--As a
    neutraliser of work behind the trenches--Raw recruits ashamed to
    wear the mask--Casualties resulting.


Probably the most important thing that was done as the result of the
Somme Battle experience was to insist on there being at least one
protected or gas-proof dugout at every headquarters, battery position,
signal station, aid post, or wherever gas shell were particularly
likely to drop.

I have deferred describing these protected shelters until now, but
as a matter of fact they had been devised and adopted nearly a year
previously, though not many of them had got into actual use. The
protection consists essentially of a damp blanket fitting closely over
the entrance to the cellar or dugout or emplacement, whichever it may
happen to be. The value of the blanket depends on the fact that if you
prevent the movement of air you prevent the movement of gas. That is
all there is to it. Stop any possible draft and you will keep out the
gas. In practice the blankets are kept rolled up out of the way and are
let down only when the alarm is sounded or when gas is about. In order
to get an air-tight joint the blanket is made to rest on a sloping
framework set into the entrance to the dugout. To make sure that the
blanket really does remain stretched out over the frame and does not
gape at all, two or three wooden battens are fastened across it at
intervals.

Where space is available two such sloping blankets are used, at least
two feet apart and preferably far enough apart to allow a stretcher in
between. This forms an “air lock”--you must go into the lock and close
the outer blanket before going through the inner one--and not only
makes protection of the interior doubly sure but makes it possible to
enter the dugout even in the middle of an attack or bombardment. In the
old days the blankets used to be sprayed with the Vermorel sprayer
solution, but anything that will keep them damp and flexible will do.
In the early days, too, the companies or batteries used to do all their
own work on protecting dugouts, and it was always possible in cold
weather to obtain an extra supply of blankets on the plea that they
were required for making gas-proof shelters. Nowadays a close eye is
kept on these supplies, which are doled out by the engineers, and it is
seen that if blanket material is supplied for protected dugouts it is
going to be used for protected dugouts, and for nothing else.

Gradually all dugouts, cellars and buildings within the gas-shell
area--let us say up to three miles from the front line--are being
provided with blanket protection, which means a big decrease in
casualties, for once inside such shelters men can sleep in more or less
comfort until they again have to don their respirators and face their
tour of duty in the poisoned air outside.

It practically came then to this--that protection against the
poison-gas shell was a question of gas-proof dugouts on the one hand
and rapidity of spreading the alarm and quickness of getting protected
on the other. At the gas schools and in the regiments and batteries
men are trained to be so quick in their movements that they can get on
their masks in six seconds. They are also taught on the burst of a gas
shell in their neighbourhood to hold their breath at once. It sounds
easy enough to do this, but it must come to a man automatically in any
circumstances he may happen to find himself--and you can find yourself
in some queer circumstances in war--and to assure this a great deal of
training is needed. Anybody, however, can hold his breath for thirty
seconds, and with practice it is possible to go well over a minute.
During this time it is possible to make a fool of oneself in half a
dozen different ways in putting on a respirator, and yet get it on in
time in the end. But drill sergeants will stand for nothing less than
the standard time and the most meticulous accuracy. God bless these
tyrants--they must have saved a lot of lives! One of the difficulties
we began to encounter with regard to gas shell was the spreading of
the alarm among men on the march or in communication trenches where no
alarm devices are installed. In some battalions it was the custom to
teach men to spread the glad tidings by taking off their steel helmets
and beating them with their bayonets. This certainly makes a good old
noise, but unfortunately it is just when gas shell are coming over that
shrapnel is also likely to be in the air, and to deprive a man of this
tin hat at this time in order to provide him with a gas alarm is rather
robbing Peter to pay Paul.

The best way undoubtedly, and the one now taught throughout the British
and American forces, is to hold the breath, then put on the respirator,
and finally spread the news to everyone else by shouting “Gas shell!”
as loudly as possible with the mask on. In this way the information
can be spread throughout a big working party or from front to rear
of a column of infantry on the march in a remarkably short space of
time. Even in the trenches it is well to give word-of-mouth warning
as well as by means of the local-alarm devices, for a second or two
of absolutely invaluable time may be saved in this way. One soldier
questioned by an officer going the rounds as to what he would do in
the event of a gas shell bombardment replied nervously: “Put on my gas
mask and shout ‘Rattles!’”

For the remainder of 1916 the boche treated us with gradually
increasing numbers of Green Cross Shell. His tactics, too, got a
bit better--I mean for him--for he began to make more concentrated
bombardments on particular targets. Possibly this was because of
special orders that were issued on the subject. One of these was by
General von Buelow to the artillery of his army, in which he said:
“There have been many instances of Green Cross Shell being fired in
small quantities. This is a waste of ammunition, as with all gas shell
good effects are only obtained by using them in large quantities. The
firing of small quantities of gas shell has also the disadvantage
that the enemy is practiced in the use of his anti-gas appliances and
attains a higher degree of gas preparedness. For this reason the effect
produced by larger quantities will be reduced.”

This showed the increasing interest in the use of gas shell taken
by the German General Staff, and heavier and more concentrated
bombardments based on the above orders became more frequent. One of
these, brought off in unusual circumstances, occurred at Arras in
December, 1916. I say “unusual” because the weather was so cold at
the time that the Green Cross liquid did not evaporate so quickly as
usual but hung about in some places for long periods. The bombardment
occurred at night and about three thousand shell must have been fired
into one corner of the town--in fact, all round the old gateway through
which the whole of the transport from the St. Pol road would have to
pass. The surrounding houses and cellars got filled with gas, and in
such billets, especially where shell had actually burst inside a room,
the liquid soaked into the walls and floors and only evaporated the
next morning when the air grew warmer. A lot of men were gassed in this
manner on the following day, as they naturally thought the gas had
vanished, and were gradually overcome as things warmed up.

In the open, gas disappeared more at its usual rate, though it hung
about all during the bombardment and for several hours after, thus
forcing men in the neighbourhood to wear respirators for long periods.
Some of these men, overcome by fatigue, actually slept in their
respirators. I think this was the first time I had heard of its being
done, though it has been done often enough since.

By this time the British Army had been fitted out with the celebrated
box respirator--a respirator of particular interest to Americans, as it
was the type adopted for and at present in use in the American Army. A
short description of it will not be out of place. The principle of the
respirator is to have a box filled with chemicals and attached by a
flexible tube to a face piece or mask, which fits closely to the face.
All air breathed by a man must therefore pass through the chemicals,
and these are so chosen that they will absorb any and every poison that
may be present in the atmosphere at the time. In order to keep the air
pure in the mask and to have a double line of protection a man breathes
through a special mouthpiece and has his nose clipped. So even if the
face piece, which is made of rubber cloth, should be torn or damaged in
any way the soldier is perfectly safe as long as he does not attempt to
talk--that is, if he keeps his nose clipped and does not remove the
mouthpiece from his mouth.

The respirator is not only active against a diversity of poisonous
gases but it will keep out very high concentrations of gas for many
hours.

One of the most misleading statements made about gas masks--sometimes
by newspaper men and consequently given wide publicity--is that such
and such a mask will stand up for so many hours against gas. It is a
very natural thing to want to know or to state how long your respirator
will last, but without stating what concentration of gas is being
talked of it is impossible to give such definite information about
any mask. It simply depends on the amount of gas there is in the air.
But the box respirator if kept in good condition and properly used is
guaranteed to keep out German gas continuously for many hours, even in
concentrations which it is quite impossible for the boche to maintain
in the field. In the American modification of the box respirator the
absorptive power of the chemicals used is even greater than in the
British box, and this makes it the best respirator in the world, which
is very reassuring for those who have to make use of it.

The box respirator is contained in a haversack and is carried slung
on the shoulder until such time as the soldier comes into the forward
areas, where it must be carried tied up on the chest ready for instant
adjustment in case of need. As I mentioned before, it can be put on in
six seconds from the word “go,” and once a man is practiced in wearing
it he can walk, run, shoot, dig, speak or do anything but eat and smoke
in it; and this for long stretches at a time. I know many cases where
men have been forced to wear masks literally continuously for more than
eight hours; and much longer periods than this, with perhaps short
intervals of rest in protected dugouts or in unaffected areas, are
common.

Of course the soldier has to be practiced in putting the mask on
quickly. It is not quite so simple as the old “gas bag,” about which
a drill sergeant said to a squad: “You just whops it out and you
whops it on.” But it does not take long to make men proficient with
the respirator, at any rate on the parade ground. It is making him
proficient under conditions of war that counts and all his instruction
is now aimed toward this end.

With the mask in position and a tin hat on top of his head a soldier
has a peculiar beetlelike appearance, which is not very improving,
though the following conversation was reported to have been overheard
by an officer about to enter a dugout:

“’Ere, mate, take yer gas mask off.”

“It is off.”

“Then for Gawd’s sake put it on!”

The Germans were much interested in our new respirators and their
development, and apparently had great difficulty in obtaining specimens
for examination. During the winter of 1916-17 German soldiers were
being offered a reward of ten marks for every British box respirator
that they brought in; but as we were doing most of the shooting at that
time I can hardly think that Fritz made a fortune out of his chance.

But to return to the gas shell. During 1917, it became apparent that
the Germans were placing more and more reliance on the use of gas shell
and were manufacturing them in enormous numbers. For a whole year after
the introduction of the Green Cross there was only one modification
of the chemicals used and that was the admixture with the diphosgene
of a material which has been called “vomiting gas.” This substance is
a chemical named chloropicrin, and it certainly lives up to its pet
name if you take a real good breath of it. The boche mixed it with his
diphosgene in order to make the latter more potent if possible, or else
because he was running short of diphosgene; but he still calls the
mixture Green Cross and uses the gas for its killing power.

The chief development, however, was rather in the tactics than in the
chemicals used. Gas shell were no longer thrown away; each target
or area was apparently considered separately and was given enough
shell to make certain of putting up a very high concentration of gas
on it. At this time the boche divided his gas-shell shoots into two
classes--those for “destructive” effect, and those for “harassing”
purposes.

The destructive fire was intended to take on big targets, which were
not only definite but were known to contain living targets--for
example, concentration points where troops were bound to be gathered;
billeting areas, including well-known villages or towns; areas known to
have a number of batteries collected in them, and so on; in the latter
case the batteries themselves would be taken on individually if their
positions were known.

Apart from a number of fairly big bombardments, like that at Arras,
mentioned above, the destructive shoots were chiefly counter-battery
ones, intended if possible to “neutralise” our artillery while it
should be actively engaged in putting down a barrage, either to prevent
a German attack or in preparing the way for our own infantry when we
were attacking, which, of course, was much more frequently the case in
1916 and the first half of 1917.

This neutralisation business wants a bit of explaining. It will
have been realised that the Germans were and still are using two
very distinct kinds of gas shell--those which kill, like the Green
Cross, and those which only temporarily put a man out of action, like
the lachrymators and nowadays the mustard gas. Of course, the idea
underlying the use of gas shell in general--and the whole war for
that matter--is to put men out of action. The most effective way of
doing this is to kill, as that puts a man out of action for good and he
doesn’t return. But you can kill men with gas only by taking them by
surprise, because of the excellence of the gas masks.

After the surprise has been effected the chief use of the gas shell
is to force the opposing side to continue wearing their gas masks
and in that way to hamper them and reduce their fighting efficiency
for considerable lengths of time. This is where the lachrymators
and mustard gas and similar stuffs come in, because they are very
persistent, and a little goes a long way in forcing a man to keep his
respirator on. The quick-killing gases, like phosgene and the Green
Cross, are not very persistent, and it would be waste of material
to continue shooting them when you could effect the same thing with
another stuff, which would hang about for hours or perhaps for days.

Now see how this affected the German “fire for effect,” or destructive
shooting, as applied to a battery, and why the gas shell are so
particularly suited for taking on targets of this kind, which used to
be engaged only by high-explosive shell. Imagine a battery of, let us
say, field howitzers. Our men are making an attack. The howitzers are
busy pounding the German trenches to bits, and then they are going to
“lift” on to the support trenches when our men go in. The whole of the
success of the infantry assault may rest on the guns’ keeping up to
the program with the requisite amount of fire. The boche business then
is to try to put our guns out of action. If he can do this he has the
infantry--I won’t say at his mercy, but at any rate at such a serious
disadvantage that their losses will be tremendous compared with what
they would be under cover of a good barrage from the guns.

Now if the enemy uses high-explosive shell to take on our batteries
he can put them out of action only by registering a direct hit. If
the guns are well dug in in good emplacements with head cover it will
be possible for high-explosive shell to drop within a dozen yards
without doing anything but scare the gunners. Not so, however, with
the gas shell. Drop enough gas shell within a dozen or twenty yards
of the battery position and the gas will float down with the wind and
penetrate every nook and cranny. If the gunners are not quick some of
them may be gassed; and if, as is sometimes the case, the gun has been
worked short-handed this alone may throw down the rate of fire to a
very considerable extent. Add to this the fact that the remainder of
the crew will have to don their respirators in order to fight their gun
at all, and it can be seen that the rate of fire may be reduced to such
a low limit as to make it of little value for the time being; or the
gun may even be put out of action completely.

Once the first surprise is over and no more immediate killing can be
counted on, the bombardment may be continued with persistent gas shell,
which are just as effective in making the men wear masks.

From our point of view it all comes down to the ability of the gunners
to be quick enough at first in preventing themselves from being gassed;
and then later of their being capable of carrying on with their firing
while wearing masks. It means that gas training and discipline are,
if possible, more important for the artillerymen even than for other
branches of the service. This is realised to the full in all their
training and practice, for if they are not able to respond to an S
O S call from the infantry an otherwise abortive German attack may
be turned into a disaster. It is like everything else in this war--a
question of training and discipline.

The neutralisation of the infantry or the transport is conducted on
similar lines, and though it rarely reaches the point of being complete
a partial neutralisation of reserves which prevents their getting up
in sufficient numbers or in time, either for reinforcement or attack,
may have most serious consequences in an operation. The partial
neutralisation is attempted, just as for the artillery, by killing as
many as possible by heavy surprise bombardments with the lethal shell
and then continuing with persistent gas in order to force the remainder
to wear their gas masks.

Let me describe as an example a particular way in which the infantry
may be partially neutralised if they are not thoroughly steady,
well-disciplined and trained up to the final dot in gas-defensive
measures and the use of their respirators. Troops in the front line,
whether they are in settled lines of trenches or merely in temporary
positions, are absolutely dependent on their supplies. Supplies of
ammunition, barbed wire and, above all, rations must be brought up to
them constantly; otherwise they cannot continue to fight. All these
things are brought up at night. The motor lorries of the Army Service
Corps take the supplies up to selected points, where they are taken
over by the first-line transport--that is, the regimental transport,
which consists of horse or mule drawn general service or limber wagons.

As night approaches everything is loaded up and departure timed so that
the trysting place with the infantry carrying parties is reached after
dark. These meeting places are very frequently crossroads immediately
below the lines, and in position warfare are usually situated close to
the entrances of the communication trenches. Pass by such a place by
day and you will find it deserted, but as soon as darkness has fallen
it becomes a hive of activity--as busy a crossroads as you might
find in the centre of a big city. There is a constant movement in and
out of men, animals and vehicles. Unloading and taking over of the
supplies alternate with checking off the goods and the moving off of
the carrying parties. Military policemen direct the traffic and relieve
the ever-threatened congestion. Altogether it is one of the busiest and
most important phases of the routine side of war, and anybody there
without a special job is a nuisance and is not wanted.

Places like this of course are apt to be well-known to the boche, and
every now and again he will drop in some high-explosive shell or put
over some shrapnel in the hope of catching the crossroads at its busy
hour. But even if he is lucky and manages to get on to the spot it
hardly holds up the work at all. I have seen a big shell drop into
just such a place and make a huge hole in the road, killing men and
horses and smashing up a wagon. Half an hour later there was hardly a
sign that anything had happened. The hole had been filled in and the
material debris cleared away. The wounded of course had been looked
after first.

Now imagine instead of ordinary shell that a number of gas shell had
been dropped into this busy centre. On a dark night, probably very
muddy underfoot and with all the excitement of kicking mules, flares
going up and anything from machine-gun bullets at long range to shell
of every size dropping in or expected, things are difficult enough. But
with the advent of the gas shell every man must get himself protected.
It is now that the “hold the breath, and mask on in six seconds” stunt
is going to be of value. With well-trained troops the losses from the
gas may be negligible, and it is equally true that they will be heavy
if the discipline is poor. But whether one way or the other it means
that all the frightened horses and mules must next be fixed with their
respirators and the work in hand must be proceeded with by everybody
while wearing gas masks. This is the real test.

If the men are well trained the carrying parties--perhaps with loads
of barbed wire on their backs--will get away as before and proceed up
the filthy communication trench to the front line; swearing probably,
uncomfortable certainly, but safe. Similarly the drivers will be
able to get their teams away from the gassed area as soon as they are
unloaded, and the serving out of the supplies will go on as before,
though at a reduced rate. But if the soldiers were not able to carry
on in these terrific circumstances--could not wear masks for long
periods and could not do anything in them--confusion would undoubtedly
supervene and the work be brought to a standstill. If this happened
the men in the front line next day would be short of rations, of
ammunition, of wire. They would, in fact, be neutralised.

It is attempted neutralisation of artillery and infantry by methods
such as these, carried out over large selected areas and generally as
a preface to an attack--either their own or ours--which constitutes
the German “fire for effect.” The “harassing fire” is simply the same
thing on a smaller scale and with no immediate tactical reason at the
back of it except that of killing and general annoyance. As a rule a
sudden burst of a few shell will be landed on some likely place, such
as the entrance to a communication trench, a sunken road, a bridge or
an observation post. These small shoots were always causing us a few
casualties. There was no warning, or somebody was not quick enough, or
did not get his respirator on, or took it off too soon. There would
always be some reason--but in the end it would generally come down to
something that the disciplinary thumbscrew could cure.

It is almost unbelievable nowadays that at one time one of the chief
sources of these constantly occurring casualties was shame-facedness at
being seen in a mask. Men would not protect themselves until absolutely
forced to do so, for fear others would regard them as being too easily
frightened. This was especially the case with new comers, who did not
want to drop in the estimation of the older hands.

One case was reported where a corporal in charge of a small party of
men in passing along a communication trench ran into some pockets of
gas from a bombardment that had just stopped. He ordered his party to
don their masks and proceeded up the trench. A few yards farther on
they passed through the support line, which happened to be fairly free
from gas, and here they were met by jeers from some of the supporting
troops who shouted “Hello, got the wind up?” and in this way induced
the corporal, really against his better judgment, to order masks off.
Not more than twenty or thirty yards farther along the party ran into a
particularly bad pocket of Green Cross and the corporal and several of
his men were so badly gassed that they had to be sent to the rear.

The attitude of the officers is always reflected in the attitude of
the men. At that time you would sometimes meet young officers who had
either been on the outer fringe of a gas-shell shoot or had merely
smelled tear gas thinking they knew all about it and refusing to
believe in the extreme deadliness of the poison gas and the need for
enhanced discipline. They would damn the gas and the need for taking
precautions, and their men would consequently damn the gas and the need
for taking precautions. This of course would mean another batch of
casualties when Fritz did treat them to the real article.

Just to show how a small matter of indiscipline may result in disaster
I would instance the case of two men who took off their respirators
in a front-line trench. Their battalion was going to be relieved
that night and they took off their webbing equipment for the purpose
of fastening on the haversack and pack. Absolutely against orders
they also removed their box respirators, and of course it was just
that moment that the boche chose for dropping in half a dozen small
trench-mortar bombs filled with phosgene. These vicious little guns
are very accurate and most of the shell landed on or near the parapet
and filled the fire bay with gas. Both men dived at once for their
respirators and in so doing upset three other men in the bay. All five
were gassed and three of them died later.




CHAPTER IX

  Mustard or Yellow Cross gas--Not deadly but a dangerous pest--Its
    troublesome persistence--Cleaning it out by fires--Sneezing or Blue
    Cross gas--Another pest--Its violent effect--The limit of gas shell
    effectiveness--The need for constant vigilance and disciplinary
    training.


This was pretty well the position of things in July of last year, when
the German use of gas shell underwent a radical development due to the
advent of the so-called mustard gas. So much has been written about
this gas and so many mis-statements have been made concerning it that
it is as well for the public to understand what mustard gas is, what
it can do and what it cannot do. On the one hand, it has been credited
with such impossible potency as would make it wonderful that any Allied
soldiers remain at all. On the other hand, it should be realised that
in mustard gas the Germans possess a very powerful weapon of war and
one which they are using to a very considerable extent.

In the first place let it be said that mustard gas is not a killing
gas like Green Cross, but that it is of the persistent type, like the
older lachrymators. Unlike the lachrymators, however, its effects are
not transitory and a man put out of action by mustard gas is going
to be a casualty for several weeks and perhaps longer. Mustard gas
principally affects the eyes and the lungs, but in a very strong vapour
or in contact with any of the actual liquid from the shell a man’s skin
may be burned very severely--even through his clothes. More attention
has been turned to this blistering effect of the gas than to anything
else, but as a matter of fact the blistering is of secondary importance
and in itself does not result in the loss of many men to the line. Of
course one has to be very careful. It is foolish, for example, to lean
up against sandbags that have been spattered with the liquid or to sit
in a mustard-gas shell crater. Sooner or later the skin underneath will
develop a severe and possibly extensive blister, which is very painful
and certain to last some time.

These burns are not dangerous, but they are most uncomfortable, to say
the least, especially as they are most easily produced on the more
tender parts of the skin.

Great excitement was caused at first among the Highland regiments
because the story was spread about that the Scots were particularly
susceptible to the mustard gas because of their attenuated clothing. As
a matter of fact the kilt doesn’t seem to be a source of danger at all,
and Highlanders are burned no more frequently than others. Possibly the
continued exposure of their legs hardens them.

The chief effects of the mustard gas are on the eyes and lungs. The
first thing you notice is the smell--which is slightly of garlic or
mustard--and irritation of the nose and throat. Neither effect is
enough to make you feel gassed, and the chief symptoms develop later
on. When the gas is strong it is apt to cause sickness and sometimes
actual vomiting. Later on the eyes inflame and get very sore, the lids
swell and blister, but no permanent injury to the eyes takes place,
though the victim may be temporarily blinded. The effects developed in
the lungs are equally painful and consist of severe inflammation and
bronchitis, which may take some time to get better and if not well
looked after may develop into pneumonia.

It will thus be seen that for a persistent gas, though not deadly
poisonous, mustard gas is a nasty proposition. First the gas does not
of itself force a man to protect himself. With the old lachrymators a
man either put on his mask or his eyes would smart and water so badly
that he could not keep them open. With the Green Cross and similar
gases a man either protects himself or dies. But with the mustard gas,
though the smell and irritation may be perfectly apparent, the effect
is not such as to force a man to don his mask. Yet if he does not do
so and continues to live in the vapour unprotected he will certainly
become a casualty. It may take half an hour, it may take several hours
to come on, but come on it will.

Another particular disadvantage of the mustard gas is its persistence.
It will hang about in shell holes for many hours and even for days. If
it gets into a dugout it is very difficult to get rid of it, and as
long as there is enough to produce the faintest smell or irritation of
the nose there is enough to bring on serious symptoms eventually. This
means that when it is used our fellows are forced to wear their masks
for very long stretches of time.

The mustard gas is known officially by the Germans as Yellow Cross
gas, and the shells are marked on the sides with bright yellow crosses
and bands. The paint used for these bands changes colour in contact
with the mustard-gas liquid, so that if a shell should leak it at once
becomes apparent and can be taken away and buried.

The Yellow Cross gas was first used at Ypres and bombardments there
were quickly followed by similar ones at Nieuport and Armentières.
Enormous numbers of shell of all calibres were employed, including a
new and larger size--the 8.3-inch howitzer shell, which holds nearly
three gallons of the liquid and can be fired a distance of six miles.

At Nieuport more than fifty thousand shell were fired in one night, and
equally large numbers were used in deluging the other towns. Since then
the numbers used have continually increased, especially when the boche
was preparing for an attack or expecting one of ours.

Duds that were collected showed that the mustard-gas liquid was a
chemical called dichlorethyl sulphide, a liquid that gives off its
vapour only slowly. The shell themselves were similar to the previous
gas shell except that the small one have a new type of fuse--a very
simple and quick-acting fuse which bursts the shell before it can get
into the ground, and consequently produces a very little crater. This
of course helps to spread the gas round more than if a big hole were
formed. The respirators keep out the Yellow Cross gas completely,
and the blanket protection of dugouts will also keep out the gas
splendidly. Of course if a dugout gets a direct hit with a mustard
shell there is nothing for it but to leave it empty for some days, as
the liquid cannot be removed by ventilation with either fans or fires.

A case that will illustrate what I mean was one in which a three-inch
mustard-gas shell got a direct hit on a doctor’s dugout and gassed
him and his orderlies. Some time afterward the remaining orderlies
thought they ought to send the doctor’s things down the line and went
in and got them out of the dugout. They noticed a faint smell but did
not worry about it, and soon afterward found themselves gassed in
consequence.

A fire was then placed in the dugout to clear it. In the meantime
the medical sergeant secured another dugout by clearing out some
infantrymen. In the evening the infantry felt soul-sick and wanted
somewhere to sleep, so they went into the original gassed dugout and
slept there. In the morning they all went down, gassed.

Where there has been no direct hit and the mustard-gas vapour gets
into the dugout, it can be cleared out just like ordinary gas, by
ventilation either with fans or by means of fires. For clearing dugouts
a great deal of reliance is placed nowadays on building small fires
inside. A dugout with two entrances can be very quickly cleared by
means of fires, as a through draft is produced, which carries the
gas away with it; but difficulty is frequently found in getting the
necessary fuel for the fire and in keeping the stuff handy. Bundles of
firewood and kindling material are supposed to be kept in the dugouts
ready for use; but, as has already been explained, the Tommies are
always on the lookout for combustible materials for their own fires,
and continual inspection has to be made to see that the special
supplies for ventilation are kept available. One officer told me that
he always had the supplies of wood, paper and kerosene kept in an
army-biscuit tin which was closed and sealed; because, as he said,
no Tommy would ever investigate the contents of a biscuit tin unless
absolutely forced to do so for lack of other food.

It should be realised, however, that properly protected dugouts have
given perfect immunity from the mustard gas as long as the protection
has remained intact, and a great deal of attention is being paid to
increasing the number of the protected shelters in order to give the
men the necessary rest from wearing their respirators occasioned by
the extensive use by the boche of his Yellow Cross Shell. In Nieuport
a special gas patrol was instituted for going the round of the town
to see that blanket protection of cellars and shelters was kept in
good condition, as there was always a chance that they would not be
well looked after or that the blankets had been taken down by some
enterprising Tommy for his own personal use.

Round about battery positions the most annoying feature of the mustard
gas is the length of time it persists. In the shell holes it can at any
rate be partly destroyed by sprinkling with chloride of lime. It is
rather interesting to find that in some captured German instructions
great secrecy was laid on the use of chloride of lime for getting
rid of the effects of mustard gas. The boche kept boxes of chloride
of lime in all positions where the gas shell were stored, and issued
instructions to his own troops that “the use of chloride of lime for
the protection of our own troops against Yellow Cross liquid must not
become known to the enemy. Observation of the strictest secrecy is
a matter of duty just as much now as it was previously. The troops
will be thoroughly instructed in these precautionary measures, but
nothing will be taught them as regards the nature or composition of the
antidote employed.”

During the present offensive the Germans have used very large
quantities of mustard gas, generally for holding purposes and against
our rear lines, battery positions, communications and reserves. This is
kept up for many hours in order to wear out the patience of our fellows
and weaken them for the coming assault.

Strong points that the boche does not wish to attack are also swamped
with the gas, and when Armentières were evacuated by the British,
Yellow Cross liquid was actually running down the gutters. But in
places that he intends to assault he will complete the mustard-gas
bombardment against our troops some considerable time before he
advances; otherwise his own troops would run into it and be forced to
don their respirators.

The quantities of shell used in this preparation are enormous and
supplies of the mustard gas must have been accumulated during the
winter to an unexpected extent and their manufacture proceeded with to
full capacity.

Take it altogether, Yellow Cross gas is very much more than an
annoyance, but there is no question that good discipline and thorough
appreciation and carrying out of the orders laid down for the
protection of troops have reduced the losses in very much the same
way that the screwed-up discipline reduced the losses after the first
introduction of Green Cross Shell. One of the most objectionable
features of the mustard gas is the continual care that has to be
exercised to prevent casualties. It is so easy for a man whose clothing
is slightly contaminated with gas to enter a dugout and contaminate
the whole of the interior and all its occupants. Sentries also have to
be posted to warn troops passing through or into an area that has been
bombarded with mustard gas, so that respirators can be put on. After a
cold night the officers must be continually on the watch to see whether
the vapours that rise from the warming of the earth by the morning sun
are charged with mustard gas, and to take the necessary precautions on
the slightest detection of the characteristic smell. This smell to my
mind is much more like garlic than mustard, and the use of the term
“mustard gas” is purely the origination of the Tommies themselves. As a
matter of fact, so as not to confuse the Yellow Cross liquid with true
mustard oil, efforts were made at first to prevent the stuff from being
called mustard gas. But once the British Tommy decides on a name for
anything, that name it is bound to have, and as he adopted the name
“mustard gas” for it mustard gas it will remain for all time.

The other new material that was introduced by the Germans in the
summer of 1917 and which, like mustard gas, has been in use ever
since is the German “sneezing gas.” For a long time high-explosive
bombardments were reported on many occasions to be accompanied with
violent sneezing, which at the time was laid down to the presence in
the air of undecomposed explosive from the shell. As a matter of fact
the sneezing was due to the presence inside the high-explosive shell
of bottles containing chemicals the chief effect of which is to cause
violent sneezing when small quantities get into the air. This sneezing
material, or sternutator, to give it its scientific name, in this
case was a solid which is atomised into tiny particles when the shell
bursts. Chemically speaking, it is called diphenylchlorarsine. This
material is used embedded in the trinitrotoluene of the explosive shell
in most cases, and such shells are called Blue Cross Shell, and are
marked accordingly. This is the third of the present trilogy of the
German coloured-cross gas shell. The sneezing gas is also sometimes
mixed in with the contents of the Green Cross Shell in considerable
proportions.

The idea underlying the use of this sneezing gas by the Germans was
apparently partly that of getting a gas which they thought might go
through our masks. In this of course they were disappointed, as the
respirator keeps out sneezing gas perfectly well. The other idea
underlying its use was apparently to cause such violent sneezing as to
prevent men from getting their masks quickly adjusted or to cause them
to sneeze them off if they had been put on.

This and all sorts of other tricks of the gas-shell business have been
tried out at various times by the Germans. While putting over Green
Cross or Blue Cross Shell, or both, they will suddenly accompany them
with violent bursts of shrapnel, the idea being that men will be so
busily occupied in putting on their masks or in sneezing that they will
not take the usual care in finding immediate cover from the shrapnel;
or that, on the other hand, in taking cover from the shrapnel they
will not get their masks on in the minimum time or will displace them
in their efforts to get away.

The sneezing caused by the Blue Cross Shell is a most peculiar and
violent kind. If you get the smallest dose of this stuff into your
lungs you start sneezing at once. You seem to sneeze from the very
bottom of your stomach upward, and feel as if the whole of your chest
were going to come out with it. This may continue almost continuously
for a short time; but there are apparently no after effects unless the
gas has been very strong indeed, in which case there is very painful
irritation of the whole of the throat and lungs which will produce
bronchitis.

This is the present stage of development of the German gas shell.
Whether they will add another colour to their lot of Green, Yellow and
Blue Cross Shell we do not know, but we are prepared for it when it
does come, and in the meantime he is getting as good as he gives.

It will be news to most people to realise how the gas shell are
gradually dominating the field. Some bombardments are composed entirely
of gas shell. As many as a quarter of a million have been fired on
the attacking front during twenty-four hours, and probably at least
one-quarter of all German shell of all calibres are gas shell.

It must be remembered that there are certain things that gas shell
cannot do. They cannot replace high-explosive shell for the demolition
of fortified works, for example. Nor can they be used for cutting
barbed wire previous to an advance; and the creeping barrage that
preceded the assaulting infantry cannot be made up by gas shell. An
S O S barrage in No Man’s Land, to cut up an attack, also would have
to be shrapnel and H. E. so as not to gas the defending troops. When
all these are cut out it will be realised that the proportion of gas
shell that are used against living targets must be very big indeed. It
is hardly too much to assert that at the present day, of the actual
methods of attacking men direct gas is the most important. It must be
realised also that it can become, and is likely to become, still more
important, and that the fight between the offence and the defence on
both sides will continue until the end of the war.

Since December of last year the boche has been copying a method
invented by the British for firing a large number of big drums of gas
simultaneously. These drums are used chiefly against the front-line
troops and are generally filled with pure phosgene. As each bomb
contains a gallon and a half of liquid and many hundreds are fired at
the same moment a good high concentration of gas is produced. Warning
is given by the tremendous roar from behind the German lines when the
flock of canister or rum-jar bombs starts on its way. Every man who
hears the noise gets his mask on at once, even before there is any sign
of gas; and if he does this there is little danger, as the respirators
are quite capable of dealing with even the very high concentrations
of phosgene produced. If a man keeps his head and obeys orders there
is little to fear from gas. But discipline must be high. As one Tommy
said: “You must be so well disciplined that when the gas alarm goes you
will even drop the rum ration so as to get your respirator on in time.”
Beyond that it is simply a question of carrying on the work in hand
while wearing a respirator, and this is entirely a matter of practice.




CHAPTER X

  Liquid Fire--First used by Germans in July, 1915--A great
    surprise and success--German hopes from it--Construction of
    a flame projector--Flammenwerfer companies--Their perilous
    duties and incidents of desertion from them--Improved types of
    projectors--Co-operation of machine-gun fire--Failure of liquid
    fire--Its short duration and short range--Ease of escape from it.


When the German Army entered on its policy of frightfulness there was
none of its new and unprincipled methods which had more immediate and
striking success than the use of liquid fire. And there is now none of
all its methods of frightfulness which has fallen more into disrepute,
and which has had less success when once the first surprise was over.

A great deal of attention has been drawn in the newspapers to the use
of liquid fire, but the average man, even in the fighting forces,
knows very little about the German methods and the appliances for
its use. Yet Germany still has special troops trained in the use
of liquid fire, and seeks continually to alter and develop the fire
weapons and their tactical employment in order to take advantage of
the undoubtedly terrible appearance and destructive power of the high
temperature flames which can be emitted. This article is intended to
show the stage to which the development has attained and the reasons
for the relatively innocuous character of what is probably the most
terror-inspiring method of modern warfare.

Throughout 1915 England was pouring new divisions of its National army
into France. As with all new troops the procedure adopted at the time
was to bring these divisions by easy stages to within a short distance
of the front line, and then send them in by companies for a four day
“instructional tour” in the trenches to pick up all the wrinkles and
habits from the seasoned troops holding the line. After the whole
formation had been put through it in this way the division would be
allotted a definite part of the line, taking it over possibly from the
troops with whom it had been in for instruction and allowing the latter
to get out for a much needed rest, or to get “fattened up” for some
impending or progressing show elsewhere.

One such new division, absolutely fresh from England and with no war
experience whatever, was the target selected by the boche for his
new deviltry. The portion of line allotted to this division was on
the outermost part of the Ypres salient and included the ruins of
the little village of Hooge right at the point of the salient. This
position had always been a hot corner--“unhealthy” in the British army
parlance--and had changed hands several times. The trenches there were
poor as it was almost impossible to get effective work done on them
owing to their exposed position. Indeed there were many parts of the
line where no movement was possible by day and the men on the posts had
to lie “doggo” until night. The two lines were very close together--in
many places less than twenty yards--and it was quite possible to hurl
hand grenades from one set of trenches to the other. It was on this
position of the line, over a front held by two battalions, that the
attack was made.

After a bombardment of several days, a mine was exploded under the
front line and then immediately afterward, at 3:20 A. M. on the
morning of the 29th of July and without the slightest warning, the
front line troops were enveloped in flames. Where the flames came
from could not be seen. All that the men knew was that they seemed
surrounded by fierce curling flames which were accompanied by a loud
roaring noise and dense clouds of black smoke. Here and there a big
blob of burning oil would fall into a trench or a saphead. Shouts
and yells rent the air as individual men, rising up in the trenches
or attempting to move in the open, felt the force of the flames. The
only way to safety appeared to be to the rear. This direction the men
that were left took. For a short space the flames pursued them, and
the local retirement became a local rout. Then the flames stopped and
machine guns began to take toll of the fugitives. Only one man from the
front trenches is known to have returned. German infantry following up,
poured into the breach in the line, widened it, took our positions as
far back as Sanctuary Wood, and then consolidated.

Ten days afterward we counter attacked and won back the whole of
the line concerned but at very considerable cost. Incidentally, we
captured two of the German flame projectors, one of them complete, and
they proved to be of the greatest possible use to us subsequently for
educating the army in the new warfare, and for inspection by our own
experts with a view to their duplication for retaliation.

Any one attempting to blame the troops attacked for their retirement
can hardly appreciate the circumstances, and, I am convinced,
over-estimates his own capacity for resistance. This attack was an
utter surprise--the kind of warfare was unknown and unheard of. Imagine
being faced by a spread of flame exactly similar to that used for the
oil burners under the biggest boilers, but with a jet nearly sixty feet
in length and capable of being sprayed round as one might spray water
with a fire hose. Personally, I am pretty sure, had I been there, that
I should have hopped it if I had not been fried by the heat or frozen
with terror. Later, when we knew the limitations of these things it was
different, though even then it is a pretty good test of a man’s nerve.

The flame projectors taken by the 14th Division in the counter attack
were simple but very interesting in construction. The main part was
a cylindrical vessel of steel about two feet in height and fifteen
inches in diameter provided with straps so that it could be carried on
a man’s back. At one side about two-thirds of the way up was a filling
hole for oil, closed by a screw cap. Near the top was a pressure gauge
attachment and toward the base was a lock closed by a lever handle and
to which could be attached a long length of flexible hose ending in a
peculiar shaped nozzle.

On examination it was found that the body of the projector was divided
internally into two compartments which could be connected by opening
another tap. The upper compartment was the compressor and the lower
the oil reservoir. The compressor chamber was filled to a pressure
of twenty-three atmospheres with deoxygenated air or nitrogen. Air
itself cannot be used because of its oxygen content forming an
explosive mixture with the vapours from the oil, and any heating on
compression, or back-flash from the flame or fuse, might make things
very unpleasant for the operator. The nitrogen required for the flame
projectors is carried into the field in large cylinders about 4 feet 6
inches in length and 6 inches in diameter. Several of these cylinders
have been captured from the enemy since. These cylinders are actually
taken into the trenches and the flame projectors charged from them
there.

The combustible liquid used in the flame throwers has varied in
source and composition from time to time, but it invariably has one
characteristic which appears to be essential for good results--it must
have light or easily volatile and heavy and less volatile fractions
mixed in carefully graded proportions. The heavy oil has sometimes
been a petroleum product and sometimes a tarry residual oil from the
distillation of wood. The light portion, which insures the jet’s
keeping alight was originally a light gasolene, but at one period,
whether from shortage of petrol or not I do not know, the place of the
latter in the mixture was taken by ordinary commercial ether.

The lighting device, fixed at the end of the flexible hose, is the
most ingenious part of the whole contrivance and is so made that the
oil ignites spontaneously the minute the jet is turned on, and is
kept alight by a fiercely burning mixture which lasts throughout the
discharge.

The nozzle is about 9 inches long and detachable so that replacement is
easy. It clips into the end of the tube and is held in position by an
annular ring. When the oil with its twenty-three atmospheres pressure
behind it is rushed out of the jet, it forces up the plunger of a
friction lighter and ignites a core of a fierce burning fuse mixture
which fills the whole of the space between the central tube and an
outer casing. The latter consists of a thick wick soaked in paraffin
wax and fitting loosely into a thin brass case.

When the nozzle is in position all that is necessary is to turn on the
tap, and the stream of flame issues from the tube and can be directed
at will.

The official name for this instrument we discovered was the
“_Flammenwerfer_” (flame thrower) and it is now never known in the
British army by anything else than its German name. Indeed this is one
of the very few German words we have adopted as an outcome of the war,
the only others I can remember being “_strafe_” and “_Kamerad_.”

Flammenwerfer attacks are made by the 3rd and 4th Guard Pioneer
Battalions and by the Guard Reserve Pioneer Regiment--all of which
troops are specially trained in flame tactics. Each battalion is
composed of six companies and each company is equipped with 18 small
or portable projectors similar to that described above, and with 20-22
large projectors of greater range. The latter larger flammenwerfer are
built on the same principle as the former, but are too heavy to be used
as mobile weapons. They are consequently built in to the trenches at
about 27 yards from the opposing lines, and, if the trenches are not
close enough together for the purpose, special saps are pushed out
and the flammenwerfer installed at the end. The range of these large
projectors is 33-44 yards and they can cover a front of 55 yards with
flames.

It is probable that in the attack at Hooge that both large and small
flammenwerfer were employed.

It is possible with the above equipment for a flame company to cover a
total front of 1100-1600 yards.

Service in the Guard Reserve Pioneers is apparently a form of
punishment. Men convicted of offences in other regiments are
transferred either for a time or permanently, and are forced under
threat of death to engage in the most hazardous enterprises and carry
out the most dangerous work. The following incident will serve to show
how the German soldiers are hounded to their death in these engagements.

In the summer of last year a small flammenwerfer attack was made
against our line at a point near Monchy, south of Arras. Two boches
armed with flame projectors of a modified pattern were instructed to
attack one of our advanced posts which was at the head of a sap running
out toward the German trenches. In broad daylight and with no covering
fire worth talking about these two poor devils were forced over the top
with revolvers pressed into their backs. One was shot down immediately.
The other managed to get clear of his own barbed wire and then
discarded his apparatus, with the intention of crawling over to us and
deserting. By this time, however, he had been badly shot up--whether
by his own people as well as by us, I cannot say. His left arm and his
right thigh were both smashed, and he had two bullets in his abdomen.
Nevertheless this man managed to crawl into our lines and was taken
care of. He was sent down to a Casualty Clearing Station in a perilous
condition, but despite his terrible injuries I understand the doctors
managed to patch him up, and that he recovered completely.

The portable flammenwerfer used in the attack just described was
brought in by our patrols the following night, the spot where he
had left it being accurately described by the wounded prisoner. It
was found to be of a new pattern and other specimens of the same
construction have since been captured, chiefly in the neighbourhood of
Lens where they were employed by the boche in the course of abortive
counter attacks against the Canadians.

In this pattern, which is shown in detail in the photograph, the
compressed nitrogen is contained in a spherical-vessel which is
contained inside a ring-shaped oil container. The whole thing looks
like a life preserver and is mounted on a light frame so that it can
be comfortably carried on the back. For a man who may suddenly have to
get down on his stomach and crawl, the apparatus is much more compact
and better fitting to the body than the original type, but it has no
advantage over the older varieties as regards range or duration.

The flexible hose which carries the lighting nozzle is made of canvas
and rubber, and enemy documents which have been captured show that only
one tube is provided for each three reservoirs. After the discharge of
one apparatus the long tube is supposed to be fitted with a new nozzle
and handed on to the others in succession.

The flammenwerfer companies are divided into squads. Following the
German army habit of adopting contractions--a habit presumably forced
on them by their cumbersome word-building language, the squads are
designated _Groftruppe_ or _Kleiftruppe_, according as they are armed
with large or small projectors. The former is a contraction for
_Grosser-flammenwerfertrupp_ (large flame projector squad), and the
latter for _Kleiner-flammenwerfertrupp_ (small flame projector squad).

In the case of attacks with the large projectors, or a combined attack
with both sizes, the chief thing is secrecy of installation in the
trenches. If it was ascertained or suspected that flammenwerfer were
being put in, our gunners would open on the position in no time and
blow the apparatus sky-high. As it is necessary to sap out to within 27
yards of our lines in order to get in a “shot,” it can readily be seen
that the possibilities of using the large projectors are very limited,
and as a matter of fact little use has been made of them.

Attacks with the portable projectors are more possible owing to their
greater mobility. But here again the essential part of the tactics and
the most difficult thing to do is to get near enough the target to
make the shot effective. The range is only fifty to sixty feet. The
German idea is to cover the advance of the “_Kleif_” men by protecting
machine-gun fire.

In an attack, the advance of the company is covered by machine-gun fire
from each side, converging at a point on the opposing trenches. In the
triangle thus formed the attacking force, the “_Kleiftruppe_” in front,
then a party of bombers, and finally the raiding or attacking party
take up their positions in No Man’s Land and crawl as far forward as
possible in the “protected area.” As soon as the flame projectors are
within range, the machine guns switch outward to each side, the flame
is discharged and the bombers rush in and try their luck in the trench.
If things go well, the infantry follows the bombing party and proceeds
to its objective.

In an attack of this kind, or a less well-supported attack such as
that at Arras, mentioned above, the attackers suffer from two such
severe disadvantages that against well-disciplined troops they stand
little chance. These disadvantages are (1) the flammenwerfer carriers
have to get so near their objective that they are almost certain to be
shot, and they then become a source of danger to their own side; (2)
men in trenches know they are perfectly safe from frontal flame attack
if they keep well down and hug the parapet side of the trench. The
reason for this is that the flame will not sink down into a trench,
but having little force behind it at the end of its journey is curled
_upward_ by the rising currents of hot air. The result is that any
sort of head cover (unless made of wood) makes perfect protection, and
a man crouching in a trench or even lying prone in a shell hole, is
very unlikely to be more than slightly scorched at the very worst. I
can vouch for this, for I have lain at the bottom of a trench with the
flames playing over my head and have not been injured in the slightest,
though I confess to being very much relieved when the flame stopped.
The only danger in trenches to men who keep their heads is that of
“blobs” of burning oil falling from the end of the fiery stream, but
this is not a very serious chance.

Another serious disability in the German liquid fire is its very short
duration. The stream of flame from the portable flammenwerfer lasts
rather less than one minute. It is impossible to charge up again on
the spot, and the result is that once the flame stops the whole game
is finished and the operators are at our mercy. Without making the
apparatus of a prohibitive weight, the duration of the flame cannot be
increased. Even the heavy projectors give only a flame lasting at the
best one minute and a quarter.

It must be realised that it is discipline and coolness (if one may use
the word) which count, and that the moral effect on unsteady troops,
unaware of the fact that the appalling flames have little destructive
value, may be very great indeed. When men have bolted from the trenches
into the open they are an easy prey.

An enfilade attack, i.e., one made from a flank, would be much more
dangerous were it not for the difficulty of approach and the fact that
the traverses of a fire-trench are as good protection against flame as
the parapet. Only where the “_Kleif_” squad can approach under cover
and get in its shot at an exposed target is the flammenwerfer likely to
have much success nowadays.

A certain amount of value was obtained from their use in this way in
the attack on Verdun for reducing isolated strong-points, notably
fortified farmhouses and broken down cottages in the ruined villages.
In certain cases the flame projector carriers were enabled to approach
under cover or by crawling among the ruins and heaps of debris, to
within striking distance of the otherwise well protected machine-gun
emplacements and positions. By suddenly playing the fire jet into the
loopholes, enough flame penetrated into the interior of the emplacement
to put the machine-gun and its crew out of action--either temporarily
or permanently. This was the opportunity awaited by the covering party
of bombers who would rush the post the minute the flame ceased, having
made their approach while the projectors were in action.

But even for special cases like these the circumstances must be so
favourable and the inherent disadvantages are so great that the
flammenwerfer cannot be counted on to attain the required result.

The low value placed by the Allies on the German flame attack can
be realised from the fact that no special form of cover is provided
against it. There is no special form of fireproof clothing or other
protection issued to the troops, and the instructions for meeting the
attack may be summarised as “Shoot the man carrying the apparatus
before he gets in his shot if possible. If this cannot be done take
cover from the flames and shoot him afterward.”




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.

  Archaic or variant spelling has been retained.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GAS AND FLAME IN MODERN
WARFARE ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.